Representations of Computational Thinking in Policy Documents in an Educational Context: The Cases of Denmark, Finland, and Norway
Renate Andersen, Oslo Metropolitan University, renate.andersen@oslomet.no Thomas Fragat, Inland Norway University of Applied Sciences, thomas.fragat@inn.no
Yurdagül Boğar, University of Helsinki, yurdagul.bogar@helsinki.fi Jesper Juellund Jensen, University College Copenhagen, jeje@kp.dk Louise Mifsud, Oslo Metropolitan University, louise.mifsud@oslomet.no
Abstract: Nordic countries have recently introduced computational thinking (CT) into school curricula. In this paper, we address the question: “Which key understandings of computational thinking are presented in Danish, Finnish, and Norwegian policy documents for primary and lower secondary education?” This study analyzes and compares the policy documents by using a combination of social network analysis (SNA) to obtain an overview of the whole dataset, and qualitative analysis to elaborate on some specific elements in the policy documents. Importantly, we find that: (1) all three policy documents focus on interpreting CT as both a problem-solving process and related to programming processes, and (2) how CT is written up in the policy documents reflects the line of thought concerning the extent to which CT is an integrated part of the course subjects in education.

Introduction
In recent years, digital transformation has become an indispensable part of society and is expected to be fostered in schools to better prepare students for their future lives. Along with digital transformation, the concept of computational thinking (CT) has become a frequently mentioned concept (Lenke & Tenberge, 2022). The term CT can be considered a relatively novel concept (Merino-Armero et al., 2022). CT was first introduced by Papert (1980), who claimed that when a child is given a computer, their learning processes and intellectual structures are strengthened. According to Wing (2006), who is often credited with reigniting interest in CT education, CT is defined as solving problems, understanding human behavior, and devising programs with the help of the core concepts of computer science. Since then, CT has been defined differently by various scholars. For example, Barr and Stephenson (2011) understood CT as a problem-solving skill that involves certain training, such as perseverance and confidence while facing a specific problem, whereas Zhang and Nouri (2019) captured CT as a 21st-century skill that future generations should develop.
CT is a concept that is both widely discussed and difficult to define (Psycharis, 2018; Tedre et al., 2021), and there is no one agreed-upon definition of CT (Shute et al., 2017). Therefore, researchers generally focus on the basic components of CT (Juškevičienė, 2020). Many countries include CT in their education policies and curricula (Hsu et al., 2019; Merino-Armero et al., 2022; Swaid, 2015). Scandinavian countries include and apply CT in their curricula in different ways (Bocconi et al., 2018). For example, in 2016, Finland, one of the first European Union countries to do so, integrated programming and CT into the “National Core Curriculum for Basic Education 2014” as a skill that should be taught to students starting from the first year of school (1st grade) (Finnish National Board of Education [FNBE], 2014). Similarly, Norway integrated CT and programming into the curriculum in mathematics, natural sciences, and arts and crafts, effective autumn of 2020. In Denmark, CT is integrated into the curriculum at the primary and secondary levels (K-9) (Bocconi et al., 2018). Furthermore, in Denmark CT was a key part of a three-year pilot program with technology comprehension that took place in 46 schools in the years 2018–2021 (Ministry of Children and Education, 2022). Despite the integration into several curricula, understanding the meaning of CT remains challenging for teachers, teacher educators, and researchers (Lee et al. 2020). Thus, we address the following research question: Which key understandings of computational thinking are presented in Danish, Finnish, and Norwegian policy documents for primary and lower secondary education?

Computational thinking in STEAM education
Science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) education has become renowned in educational studies, since it is an interdisciplinary approach (Liliawati et al., 2018; Tan et al., 2021) aimed at contributing to

the improvement of students’ skills such as problem-solving, creative thinking, questioning, and critical thinking (Psycharis, 2018). In STEAM, the art discipline is integrated into STEM disciplines to increase efficiency in STEM education (Tan et al., 2021) and add an aesthetic and authentic dimension to STEM (Bequette & Bequette, 2012). There is a close relationship between STEAM disciplines and CT. STEAM disciplines also aim to provide individuals with skills such as problem-solving, debugging, and sharing their ideas with others (Juškevičienė, 2020). Several researchers have emphasized the need to train students to acquire CT skills and use them (Barr & Stephenson, 2011; Park & Park, 2018). Moreover, researchers argue that CT should be taught by integrating it with an interdisciplinary approach, such as STEAM (Psycharis, 2018). Through STEAM education, students are expected to learn certain concepts in a meaningful way and to use these concepts to solve problems (Park & Park, 2018). Through STEAM education, students are exposed to many problem-solving activities that contribute to the development of students’ CT (Charlton & Luckin, 2012). Beyond using technology, CT occurs while solving complex problems (McClelland & Grata, 2018). Thus, CT is an integral part of STEAM (Dolgopolovas & Dagienė, 2021).

Studies related to CT and policy documents
CT has been recognized as an important issue in policy and curriculum documents in various countries and has been recognized as a key competence (Voogt et al., 2015) and included in several transnational policy initiatives (McGarr et al., 2021). Robertson (2005) highlighted the demand for schools to respond to the global knowledge economy. Hsu et al. (2019) examined CT educational policy, concluding that CT involves diverse terminology, and its current status is diversified across the globe. The authors further highlighted four development trends that arise: collaboration and partnerships across sectors and nations, arguments presenting a broad perspective and citing common themes, a redefinition of digital competence, and an accentuation of expanding access and interest. Hsu et al. (2019) found that although a term that refers to “computational thinking” is used in policy documents and curricula, it is not used by others or is used rarely when compared to other terms. For example, in the Nordic context, “algorithmic thinking” is the CT term used in Finland and Norway (Hsu et al., 2019).

Methods and case design
This study adopted social network analysis (SNA) (Scott, 2000) as a research approach. Prior to conducting the data analysis, two steps were taken. First, all three countries participated in the data analysis, which ensured contextual understanding. Thus, we were conscious of the challenges inherent in comparative interpretation (Phillips & Ochs, 2004). Second, to increase the validity of the process, a minimum of two researchers analyzed each policy document from the respective country.
Methods for collecting data
Relevant policy documents from Finland, Denmark, and Norway were accessed through government repositories. In Finland, strategic education aims are described in national-level curriculum materials and government programs. The national-level curriculum is revised, on average, every 10 years. Consequently, two documents from Finland were included in this study. One of these documents is the National Core Curriculum for Basic Education 2014 and the other is the current Government Programme 2015. The Finnish documents were accessed through two archives; National Core Curriculum for Basic Education 2014 was accessed from the “Finnish National Agency for Education” website https://www.oph.fi/en and “Government Programme 2015” website https://vnk.fi/en/government-programme.The Danish documents were obtained through searches in two governmental databases: the Danish Ministry of Higher Education and Science at ufm.dk and the Ministry of Children and Education at buvm.dk. The Norwegian documents were accessed through two repositories: the government.no and the Directorate for Education and Training websites. Only documents related to education were extracted, and the included documents focused on compulsory education and primary and lower secondary education.
Screening policy documents with a set of predefined CT keywords
The relevant policy documents were screened using a set of predefined CT keywords. Shute et al. (2017) defined CT as consisting of the following components: decomposition, which is about the process of breaking a complex problem into manageable smaller pieces; abstraction, which is about the ability to extract the essentials of a complex problem; designing logical algorithms and ordering them to solve the problem; debugging, which is about the process of finding and resolving errors; refining the process by performing iterations to achieve the ideal result; and generalization, which is about the ability to transfer CT skills to other problems and situations.

Taking Shute et al. (2017) as our point of departure as well as the source of country-specific CT terms, we used the following CT terms to screen the policy documents: digitalization, algorithmic, problem-solving, programming, automation, identifying patterns, computational thinking, computer science, modeling, coding, and technological comprehension.
Methods for analyzing the data
SNA was used to analyze the most relevant policy documents in teacher education in Finland, Norway, and Denmark. Scott (2000) defined SNA as a set of techniques and operations that analyze the relational aspects of a network by utilizing algorithms and computational techniques. Since SNA makes it possible to analyze and compare a considerable set of data by evaluating the social relationships in a network by conceptualizing individuals or groups as nodes and their connections as ties and by scrutinizing these connections as mathematical or visual patterns, it was considered a suitable method (Scott, 2000). We applied SNA measurement degree centrality to calculate which policy documents had the highest frequency of CT keywords and, as a result, identified the most central policy documents regarding the use of CT keywords. Degree centrality is defined as the number of ties attached to a node (Scott, 2000). In our case, this means the number of times the CT keywords appear in the policy documents. Gephi, a software program for conducting SNA analysis (Gephi, 2022), was used to create and visualize the sociograms of the different countries (Norway, Denmark, and Finland) (Figures 1, 2, and 3) and their policy documents and the use of CT keywords in them. A sociogram is a visualization of SNA analysis, which consists of nodes representing actors and lines to show ties or relations (Hanneman & Riddle, 2005). SNA provided us with useful information about the most relevant policy documents and CT keywords connected to them; the analysis did not reveal information about the qualitative content in the documents. To address this limitation, we also take on a qualitative perspective by analyzing the qualitative data extracts illustrating the use of CT keywords in the policy documents.

Results
Social network analysis of policy documents in Finland, Norway, and Denmark
Below, in Figure 1, we present three sociograms that visualize the SNA results, reflecting Finland, Norway, and Denmark. The yellow nodes visualize the policy documents, and the blue nodes visualize the CT keywords. The SNA centrality degree measurement was computed for both the policy documents (yellow nodes) and the respective CT keywords (blue nodes). As such, the larger size of a node reflects a larger degree of centrality. A thicker tie indicates a higher frequency of the use of the CT keyword in the policy document, as the size of the ties also provides information on degree centrality. Figure 1 presents a visualization and comparison of the policy documents.

Figure 1
An overview of the policy documents (yellow nodes) and the related CT keywords (blue nodes) in Finland, Norway, and Denmark.
Norway
Finland




Denmark

Analyzing the policy documents: In Finland, the sociogram shows that there are mainly two policy documents, with the “National Core Curriculum for Basic Education 2014” being the most relevant document from a CT perspective, as reflected by the size of its yellow node being the largest. The positioning of the node in the center of the sociogram reveals that this document often refers to and uses several CT keywords. However, in Norway and Denmark, the landscape is quite different, where there are multiple policy documents that relate to CT in different ways. In Norwegian policy documents, the most central policy document using CT keywords is “Technology and programming for everyone.” However, the policy documents “Digitalization strategy for basic education (2017),” “Programming in school” (2016), and “Joy of creativity and the urge to explore” are central according to the degree of centrality (reflected in the size of the node). The most central policy document in Denmark is “Experiments with technology understanding in primary school compulsory teaching (2021),” since it has the largest degree of centrality (reflected in the largest yellow node). However, as the nodes visualize with their size, “Curriculum (2018),” “Preliminary study – Experiments with technology understanding in the compulsory education of the primary and lower secondary school,” and “Teaching guide” are also among the top 5 most relevant policy documents using key CT words.
Analyzing the use of CT keywords in relation to the policy documents: In the Finnish sociogram, we found that the CT keywords digitalization and automation are the ones with the highest degree of centrality (reflected in the blue nodes with the largest size), which means that these keywords are most used in the policy document in connection to CT. By contrast, it is interesting to observe that computational thinking and algorithmic thinking as explicit keywords are not present in the policy document at all. In the Norwegian sociogram, the top three most used CT keywords across the policy documents are problem-solving, digitalization, and technological comprehension. The CT keywords programming and computational thinking are also central. In the Danish sociogram, the two most prominent keywords in the policy documents are technology comprehension and digitalization, whereas identifying patterns does not appear at all. To summarize, most keywords appear in policy documents across all three countries, with digitalization standing out as a prominent keyword in all three countries, setting an important context for the integration of CT in education. However, the sociogram also reveals significant differences: For instance, while problem-solving is a predominant keyword in the sociogram for Norway, it is far less central for the other two countries. Similarly, computational thinking as a keyword is markedly present in the Norwegian and Danish sociograms but does not appear at all in the Finnish case. Thus, the sociograms expose how the different countries apply different CT keywords in their policy documents, entailing different implementations and approaches to CT.
Exploring the understanding of the CT keywords in the policy documents
Based on the SNA analysis visualized in Figure 1, we selected the most central policy document in each country that had the largest degree of centrality. This document was used as a starting point for the qualitative analysis. Figure 2 below present an overview of the selected policy document from each country and the CT keywords that are connected to that policy document, as reflected in the sociograms in Figure 2. Furthermore, the two most

relevant CT keywords from each policy document were selected. To contextualize the CT keywords, qualitative data extracts are presented together with their interpretations.
Figure 2
Sociograms reflecting the selected policy document from each country and the CT keywords connected to that policy document.
Finland: National Core Curriculum for Basic Education (2014)






Norway: Technology and programming for everyone (2016)




Denmark: Experiments with technology understanding in primary school compulsory teaching (2021)


A comparison of the sociograms in Figure 2 revealed a common denominator in the policy documents: CT keyword programming is among the top 3 most used CT keywords in the documents, which is reflected in the size of the nodes. The CT keyword problem-solving is also the most central node in the selected policy document in Finland and Norway, whereas it is not apparent at all in the Danish policy document. Although digitalization is a prevalent keyword in all the policy documents, it does not reveal much about how CT is understood and will therefore not be further discussed. However, a notable difference in the sociograms is in Denmark’s policy document, in which technological comprehension stands out as a central node, which we further explored.
In the Finnish policy document, National Core Curriculum for Basic Education (2014), programming is mentioned as being integrated into the subjects: “As part of the studies of various subjects, programming is practiced.” The document further expands this notion: “Students develop an understanding of in how the decisions taken by people have an effect on the path technology progress while working on programming.” Programming is considered the way that “ordinary relationships are defined and objects are placed, classified and compared by the learners. By taking different perspectives, they practice analyzing mathematical situations. The learners become acquainted with the core features of programming by formulating and testing step-by-step instructions.” We can also conclude that the policy document defines the reason for the relevance by stating that “the learners

get the chance to have and share their practices with digital media and programming activities fitting their ages and the rationale being to inspire the learner to come up with as computer programs in graphic programming medium.” In the policy document, problem-solving is described as “the guidance for the learners to develop their algorithmic thinking and skills in applying mathematics and programming in problem-solving,” and it is explained as a process of “guidance for the learners to develop their reasoning and problem-solving skills.” It is further expanded as the way “the learners are mentored to use information on their own and in interaction with others in terms of problem-solving, argumentation, reasoning, drawing of conclusions and invention.” Together, these statements underscore the relationship between problem-solving and programming.
In the Norwegian document “Technology and programming for everyone” (2016), programming is defined as “breaking a given problem into a set of commands and then having a computer execute those commands.” The document underlines that the rationale behind programming is for students to take control of technology and “gain insight into and experience with basic technological principles and digital technology - including programming.” Programming can be viewed as both a problem-solving process and a technical process when using a computer to perform tasks. Problem-solving is highlighted as part of a key competence in digital technology, and an integral part of computational thinking: “Solving a problem by specifying a precise sequence of commands is called computational thinking or algorithmic problem-solving, and such a precise sequence of commands is called an algorithm.” The notion of problem-solving as an integral part of CT is further elaborated as “transforming a general problem into a form that can be solved using programming.” Programming in the Norwegian policy document is understood as the technical programming process when using a computer to perform tasks, whereas problem-solving is understood in relation to CT and programming.
The Danish policy document “Experiments with technology understanding in primary school compulsory teaching” (2021) is an assessment of the three-year pilot program in the years 2018–2021. Technological comprehension is mentioned as “an educative and creative subject in the school consisting of four competence areas: (1) digital empowerment, (2) digital design and design processes, (3) computational thinking, and (4) technological knowledge and skills.” Thus, in Denmark, CT occurs in the context of this subject. The subject is displayed in two general approaches: one that is “creative and constructive (focus on design and skills), and the other that is critical and analytical (focus on empowerment and thinking). The overarching purpose of the subject is described in the document as enabling students to become “active, critical and democratic citizens in a digitalized society,” again displaying the two general approaches. CT is explicitly employed as a key concept in the document. It is characterized as being about “analysis, modeling, and the structuring of data and data processes.” Thus, CT is understood as a predominantly analytical competence, and not a creative and constructive one. Accordingly, CT does not include programming, coding, debugging, etc. in the Danish case. Although it is not part of CT, programming is nonetheless included in the subject of technological comprehension as part of “technological knowledge and skills.” Here, it is linked to the creative approach, as programming “makes it possible for students to influence what they want to create” and “means the freedom to determine in which direction the students want to work.”

Discussion
Our comparison of the policy documents from the three Nordic countries and their relations to CT keywords (Figures 1 and 2) revealed two main findings: (1) All three policy documents have a focus on interpreting CT as both a problem-solving process and related to programming processes. (2) How CT is written up in the policy documents reflects the line of thought concerning the extent to which CT is an integrated part of the course subjects in education.
CT as both problem-solving and a programming process. One common denominator from the analysis of the sociograms in Figures 1 and 2 is that CT is portrayed in all three policy documents as both a problem- solving process and a programming process. However, by focusing on the qualitative data extracts from the policy document in Denmark, we observed that the picture is more nuanced. Programming is not part of CT in the Danish context, as CT and programming are viewed as two separate competences, both elements of the overarching subject of technological comprehension. Lee et al. (2020) stressed that although programming and coding may be considered part of CT, it would be incorrect to restrict CT to computer science, since it is present in a broad range of professional fields. Thus, the separation of CT and programming in Danish policy documents seems to take one step further, emphasizing the difference between the general, predominantly analytical thinking processes of CT and the creative and constructive skills of programming. Similarly, although there are no instances of problem-solving in the Danish policy documents, this CT keyword is part of the overarching subject technological comprehension and thus related to, but nevertheless separated from, CT. In Norway and Finland, the policy documents reveal that problem-solving and programming can be considered related.

CT as an integrated part of learning subjects. How CT is presented in the policy documents reflects the reasoning of the policy documents concerning the extent to which CT is an integrated part of the course subjects in education. In Norway, CT is viewed as fully integrated in the subjects of math, science, music, and arts and crafts. In Denmark, CT is part of the wider subject of “Technology comprehension”, which in the pilot program was taught both as a separate subject and as an integrated part of the subjects Danish, math, visual arts, natural sciences/technology, craft and design, physics/chemistry and social studies. In Finland, CT is fully integrated into subjects. The analysis of the qualitative text extracts from the policy documents in Norway and Finland showed that they both mentioned CT as a keyword. In the Norwegian policy document (Figure 2), CT is mentioned in connection with programming as part of specific course subjects, which is similar in Finland. However, Denmark differs, as it has an explicit focus on CT (supported by the visible node in Figure 2). Denmark has its own subject, technological comprehension, which focuses on CT. This supports the finding that CT in the Nordic countries is an integrated part of learning subjects: (a) In Norway, CT is viewed as fully integrated into the subjects of math, science, music, and arts and crafts; (b) Finland has fully integrated CT into subjects; and (c) Denmark considers CT as part of the wider subject “Technology comprehension”.

Conclusion and implications
In this study, we explored key understandings of CT as presented in Finnish, Norwegian, and Danish policy documents for primary and secondary education. By conducting an SNA analysis of selected policy documents retrieved using CT keywords, we found that the understanding of CT is two-fold in these countries: 1) CT as both a problem-solving and programming process, and 2) CT as an integrated part of learning subjects. Integrating CT and programming as part of learning subjects enforces new demands on teachers in classrooms, as many of them have only some or no experience with CT and, especially, programming from their own schooling or teacher education. Some of the skills needed have previously been associated with computer science, and often these skills have been left to teachers of computer science to teach. However, the new changes imply a new focus on teachers’ competencies, and we urge teacher educators to strengthen continuing professional development programs, enhance the focus on CT in teacher education, and facilitate support for communities of CT practice involving teachers, teacher educators, and researchers.

References
Barr, V., & Stephenson, C. (2011). Bringing computational thinking to K-12: What is involved and what is the role of the computer science education community? ACM Inroads, 2(1), 48–54. https://doi.org/10.1145/1929887.1929905
Bequette, J. W., & Bequette, M. B. (2012). A place for art and design education in the STEM conversation. Art Education, 65(2), 40–47. https://doi.org/10.1080/00043125.2012.11519167
Bocconi, S., Chioccariello, A., & Earp, J. (2018). The Nordic approach to introducing computational thinking and programming in compulsory education. Report prepared for the Nordic@ BETT2018 Steering Group. https://doi.org/10.17471/54007
Charlton, P., & Luckin, R. (2012). Time to reload? Computational thinking and computer science in schools. What the research says. Briefing 2 (27 April). https://knowledgeillusion.files.wordpress.com/2012/03/time-to-re- loadwhattheresearchsaysbriefing27april2012.pdf
Dolgopolovas, V., & Dagienė, V. (2021). Computational thinking: Enhancing STEAM and engineering education, from theory to practice. Computer Applications in Engineering Education, 29(1), 5–11. https://doi.org/10.1002/cae.22382
Finnish National Board of Education [FNBE]. (2014). The national core curriculum for basic education. National Board of Education.
Gephi. (2022). Gephi makes graphs handy. Retrieved from https://gephi.org/
Hanneman, R. A., & Riddle, M. (2005). Introduction to social network methods. University of California, Riverside.
Hsu, Y. C., Irie, N. R., & Ching, Y. H. (2019). Computational thinking educational policy initiatives (CTEPI) across the globe. TechTrends, 63(3), 260–270. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11528-019-00384-4
Juškevičienė, A. (2020). STEAM teacher for a day: A case study of teachers’ perspectives on computational
thinking. Informatics in Education, 19(1), 33–50. https://doi.org/10.15388/infedu.2020.03
Lee, I., Grover, S., Martin, F., Pillai, S., & Malyn-Smith, J. (2020). Computational thinking from a disciplinary perspective: Integrating computational thinking in K-12 science, technology, engineering, and mathematics education. Journal of Science Education and Technology, 29(1), 1–8. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10956-019-09803-w

Lenke, M., & Tenberge, C. (2022). Future primary teacher education: Computational thinking and STEAM. In PATT 39 on the Edge Technology, Innovation and Education Proceedings (pp. 429–436). St. John’s, Newfoundland and Labrador, Canada: Memorial University of Newfoundland.
Liliawati, W., Rusnayati, H., & Aristantia, G. (2018). Implementation of STEAM education to improve mastery concept. IOP Conference Series: Materials Science and Engineering 288 012148. https://doi.org/10.1088/1757-899X/288/1/012148
McClelland, K., & Grata, L.A. (2018). Review of the importance of computational thinking in K-12. In J. C. Kush & C. Lester (Eds.), Proceedings of the eLmL 2018: The Tenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning (pp. 2–34). Red Hook.
McGarr, O., Mifsud, L., & Colomer Rubio, J. C. (2021). Digital competence in teacher education: Comparing national policies in Norway, Ireland and Spain. Learning, Media and Technology, 46(4), 483–497. https://doi.org/10.1080/17439884.2021.1913182
Merino-Armero, J. M., Gonzalez-Calero, J. A., & Cozar-Gutierrez, R. (2022). Computational thinking in K-12 education. An insight through meta-analysis. Journal of Research on Technology in Education, 54(3), 410–437. https://doi.org/10.1080/15391523.2020.1870250
Ministry of Children and Education. (2022). Experiments with technology understanding in primary school compulsory teaching. https://emu.dk/grundskole/forskning-og-viden/paedagogisk-it/evaluering-af- forsoeg-med-teknologiforstaaelse
Papert, S. (1980). Mindstorms: Children, computers and powerful ideas. Basics Books.
Park, Y. S., & Park, M. (2018). Exploring students competencies to be creative problem solvers with computational thinking practices. Journal of the Korean Earth Science Society, 39(4), 388–400. https://doi.org/10.5467/JKESS.2018.39.4.388
Phillips, D., & Ochs, K. (2004). Researching policy borrowing: Some methodological challenges in comparative education. British Educational Research Journal, 30(6), 773–784. https://doi.org/10.1080/0141192042000279495
Psycharis, S. (2018). STEAM in education: A literature review on the role of computational thinking, engineering epistemology and computational science. computational STEAM pedagogy (CSP). Scientific Culture, 4(2), 51–72. https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.1214565
Robertson, S. L. (2005). Re‐imagining and rescripting the future of education: Global knowledge economy discourses and the challenge to education systems. Comparative Education, 41(2), 151–170. https://doi.org/10.1080/03050060500150922
Scott, J. (2000). Social network analysis: A handbook. SAGE Publishing.
Shute, V. J., Sun, C., & Asbell-Clarke, J. (2017). Demystifying computational thinking. Educational Research Review, 22, 142–158. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.edurev.2017.09.003
Swaid, S. I. (2015). Bringing computational thinking to STEM education. Procedia Manufacturing, 3, 3657–- 3662. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.promfg.2015.07.761
Tan, W. L., Samsudin, M. A., Ismail, M. E., Ahmad, N. J., & Talib, C. A. (2021). Exploring the effectiveness of STEAM integrated approach via Scratch on computational thinking. Eurasia Journal of Mathematics, Science and Technology Education, 17(12), em2049. https://doi.org/10.29333/ejmste/11403
Tedre, M., Denning, P., & Toivonen, T. (2021). CT 2.0. Proceedings of the 21st Koli Calling International Conference on Computing Education Research, Article No: 3, (pp. 1–8). https://doi.org/10.1145/3488042.3488053
Wing, J. M. (2006). Computational thinking. Communications of the ACM, 49(3), 33–35. https://doi.org/10.1145/1118178.1118215
Voogt, J., Fisser, P., Good, J., Mishra, P., & Yadav, A. (2015). Computational thinking in compulsory education: Towards an agenda for research and practice. Education and Information Technologies, 20(4), 715–728. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10639-015-9412-6
Zhang, L., & Nouri, J. (2019). A systematic review of learning computational thinking through Scratch in K-9.
Computers & Education, 141, 103607. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2019.103607

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the Norwegian Research Council grant no 320322.