Encountering Freedom in the Wild: A comparative Case Study of a Formal Classroom and Nature-based Informal Learning Environment Concerning the Role of Knowledge Authority and Subjectification

Mandy Dunphy, Baylor University, mandy_dunphy@baylor.edu Kay E. Ramey, University of Iowa, kay-ramey@uiowa.edu Brian Hand, University of Iowa, brian-hand@uiowa.edu

Abstract: This study explores the dynamics of a formal classroom and nature-based informal learning environment, focusing on their impact on student subjectification and knowledge authority. This comparative case study, involving 27 fifth-grade students and their teacher, examined shifts in teaching approaches and student autonomy across these settings through analysis of observational data, recordings, interviews, and surveys. A didactic approach centralizes knowledge authority in the classroom, while nature-based programs adopt a more dialogical model that promotes exploration. Findings reveal that the environment supports a shift in teacher and student roles, enhancing student agency and subjectification. This research contributes to the discourse on generative learning environments (GLE) and highlights practices that balance teacher authority with student empowerment. It also underscores the need for further research on the connections between informal learning contexts and student subjectification.

Problem statement
Envisioning a classroom today often evokes images of neatly arranged desks, a chalkboard, and the ever-present
U.S. flag—a snapshot reminiscent of the first author’s own schooling experiences in the rural Midwestern United States. Despite teaching in diverse learning environments for over a decade, this persistent memory symbolizes an entrenched education system that often prioritizes rote memorization over authentic learning (Giroux, 2010; Hooks, 1994; Robinson, 2001). Such a system, centered on disseminating a singular “truth,” frequently suppresses creativity, enforces conformity, and perpetuates what Freire described as a transactional model of education—one in which students are positioned as passive recipients of knowledge (e.g. objects) rather than active constructors of meaning (e.g. subjects) (Freire, 1993, as cited in Biesta, 2017).
Despite recent curricular reforms advocating for student-centered approaches, formal classroom learning environments (LEs), characterized by structured curricula and standardized assessment methods (Grunzke, 2019), can inadvertently limit students’ opportunities to explore ideas freely, (Hand & Cavagnetto, 2023; Lowell et al., 2024). Conversely, informal learning environments, specifically nature-based settings, offer alternative spaces for student-driven inquiry, providing more opportunities to construct knowledge in authentic contexts (Link, 2023; Mann et al., 2022). Although extensive research has investigated knowledge authority in formal classroom environments (Chen et al., 2017; Fiorella & Mayer, 2016; Lammert et al., 2022; Pace & Hemmings, 2007; Suh et al., 2022), fewer studies have explored these dynamics specifically within informal, nature-based environments.
To explore these two environments this study investigated how one fifth grade teacher and her 27 students navigated the shift between their formal classroom and a three-day nature-based learning experience. Findings provide insights into how nature-based environments disrupted traditional roles, affording greater freedom for teachers and students to engage in dialogic discourse compared to the formal classroom setting. This research suggests that nature-based settings can cultivate more generative and dialogical student-centered learning environments.

Theoretical framework
This study is grounded in two frameworks—Gert Biesta's (2017) philosophical exploration of freedom and the theoretical principles of Generative Learning Theory(Osborne & Wittrock, 1985). Biesta's work, particularly in "The Rediscovery of Teaching" (2017), challenges traditional educational models and argues that education should go beyond qualifying students for the workforce and socializing them into existing norms; it should also support their subjectification—the process of becoming autonomous, responsible agents. This study applies Biesta's ideas to explore how the two different LEs influence students' opportunities to engage as subjects.

Generative Learning Theory (GLT), proposed by Osborne and Wittrock (1985), complements Biesta's framework by emphasizing the active role of learners in constructing meaning. GLT posits that generative learning occurs when students actively engage in the process of integrating new information with their existing knowledge. We used GLT to examine how the formal or informal LE shapes students' opportunities to construct knowledge and exercise their subject-ness. This study focuses on the role of dialogue, language, and teacher-student interactions in fostering or hindering subjectification. The research aims to provide a nuanced understanding of how LEs maximize or hinder students' opportunities to engage in their ideas by integrating these two frameworks. Furthermore, while scholars have utilized GLT to explore knowledge authority and the impact of language and dialogic interactions in the classroom (Chen et al., 2017; Fiorella & Mayer, 2016; Suh et al., 2022), researchers are only just beginning to explore how the concept of equality of intelligence and subjectification relates to GLT in the classroom LE (Hand & Cavagnetto, 2023). Exploring these concepts in LEs outside the formal LE remains underexplored. This warrants further investigation into how knowledge authority and language, as they relate to subjectification, manifest in informal NBL environments and could provide valuable insights for educators and researchers alike.
This study focused on dialogue as a way of exploring and understanding subjectification in each LE. Vygotsky (1987), as cited by Matusov et al. (2013), posited that the essence of humanity is dialogue, which in education involves interactive communication between teachers and students, where ideas are exchanged, challenged, and refined (Lemke, 1990). Dialogue provides a window into the unseen conscious experiences of students, offering insights into how they process information and construct meaning. By prioritizing dialogue as the primary form of data, this study captures the interactive nature of learning and subjectification, observing how students articulate understanding, respond to critical probing, and negotiate meaning in real time. The teacher's role is crucial in framing the LE to facilitate this process, aligning with Biesta's educational philosophy and GLT to maximize the development of autonomous, engaged, and critically thinking individuals.

Social and material context
Ms. Ash
Ms. Ash is a warm and welcoming 5th-grade teacher with 23 years of experience in the K-12 school system. Her commitment to student learning is evident through conversations and observations, and she is dedicated to her students. Her structured classroom routine created a calm start to each morning. She spent time greeting as many students as possible and began each day with a morning circle, discussing emotional management and other socio- emotional learning strategies. These daily greetings served to check in with students.
As part of this study, Ms. Ash completed an epistemic orientation survey (EOS, Suh et al., 2022) that explored her epistemic beliefs and the Connectedness to Nature Scale (CNS, Mayer & Frantz, 2004). Due to some incomplete survey responses, it was not possible to fully score Ms. Ash’s responses, however her survey data was utilized to provide context of how Ms. Ash situates herself. The surveys revealed three key findings about her connection to nature, her attitude toward teaching in nature, and her beliefs about learning:
Connection to Nature. Ms. Ash enjoys nature and feels strongly connected to it. She appreciates the intelligence of other living organisms, feels part of the web of life, and considers herself embedded in the natural world.
Attitude Towards Teaching in Nature. Ms. Ash is excited about teaching in nature and believes it positively impacts student learning. She understands effective strategies for teaching environmental concepts and is confident in finding ways to integrate nature into her teaching. However, some observations indicated a slight nervousness and lack of confidence in navigating teaching in nature.
Beliefs About Student Learning. Ms. Ash believes that teachers significantly impact student learning. She agreed that teacher effort leads to positive changes in student achievement in understanding environmental concepts. She also believes that when students improve, it is due to the extra attention from the teacher, indicating a teacher-driven approach to student learning. Furthermore, Ms. Ash’s believes in the social construction of knowledge. She does not believe her knowledge came solely from self-construction and interactions with people but also acknowledges that learning happens through negotiation.
These findings somewhat align with Ms. Ash's responses in the EOS, where she agreed that students learn best when they have ownership of their learning and that it is acceptable for students to develop incorrect answers if they can justify them. She also emphasized the importance of students negotiating meaning between their prior knowledge and new information. However, a slight contradiction emerged regarding control over learning. While she expressed that teachers should not dominate classroom knowledge, her responses in the attitudes survey indicated that she views teachers as primarily responsible for student learning. This suggests that

Ms. Ash's epistemic orientation for learning is somewhat teacher-driven, placing her toward the less generative side of the orientation spectrum through the lens of GLT. This perspective aligns with many classroom teachers who see themselves as drivers of the learning process. It is important to note that her beliefs are not reflective of good or bad teaching but provide valuable insight into understanding learning environments. Although self- reported surveys have limitations, they offer a glimpse into Ms. Ash's views on learning and provide context to the learning environments that Ms. Ash creates.
The formal learning environment: The classroom
The formal classroom environment takes place in a large urban school in the Midwestern United States. The main focal point of the classroom features large windows along the back wall, which allow ample natural light to illuminate the space. These windows are surrounded by various plants, contributing to the room's integration of natural elements. The shelves beneath the windows display a collection of items, including a photo of primatologist Jane Goodall and a Jane Goodall Barbie doll. The classroom is decorated primarily in earthy tones of blues and greens, which align with Ms. Ash’s connectedness to nature.
While Ms. Ash selected most of the room's decorations, the hallway leading to the classroom displays students' projects and work. This contrast indicates that student work is displayed prominently, albeit outside the main classroom space. Each morning, classical music plays as students enter the classroom. The board lists tasks for students to complete while waiting for morning announcements, typically including selecting their lunch, finishing previous assignments, or reading.
Beyond the classroom's physical structures, the learning environment consists of a strict scope and sequence of curricula. Ms. Ash is expected to teach the same concepts and material, at the same time and pace as her two fellow 5th grade teachers, as well as keep pace with all other elementary schools across the large school district to help support a large transient population of students. Through the observations and conversations with Ms. Ash, this limited the amount of flexibility she had in what she taught and the pace at which she taught. This issue highlights the tension many teachers face in the formal classroom environment.
Informal nature-based learning environment: School of the Wild
School of the Wild (SOTW) offers a NBL experience during the traditional academic year, either in the fall or spring. Students transition from their usual classroom settings to local state or county parks near their school for at least four days. In small groups of 8-15 peers, they engage in one of five unique areas of study each day under the guidance of local naturalists, conservationists, and their classroom teachers. The curriculum ensures that the environment is integral to the activities, making the concepts relevant to the students and their local context. The curriculum is interdisciplinary and incorporates science, language arts, social studies, art, math, physical education, and outdoor recreation (UI WILD- The University of Iowa, 2022).
The data presented here is part of a larger study, following three teachers from this school and their students as they participated in SOTW. However, our focus here is on just one of those three teachers, Ms. Ash. Participants in this study attended SOTW for three days at a local state park 30 minutes from the school. On Day One, students explored the landscape's geological features and wetlands. Their classroom teacher taught this day. During Day Two, another fifth-grade teacher taught students about archeology and how the land can tell us about our past. On Day Three (this group’s final day), students learned about birds and identification processes. This day was taught by another fifth-grade teacher and a SOTW staff member. The original planning structure was supposed to be four days. However, the school lost a day due to a school violence threat, which caused the student group structure to be rearranged at the last minute and only allowed for a three-day experience and larger group sizes, which is not usual.

Positionality
The first author has 12 years of classroom teaching experience and a background in environmental education, which influenced the study design and the interpretation of findings. Their professional experience in structured classroom settings provided insights into traditional pedagogical practices, while their academic experience in environmental education informed their interest in exploring nature-based learning environments. These dual perspectives shaped the research questions and methodology, bringing both a critical understanding of formal education and an appreciation for the interdisciplinary potential of nature-based learning. Throughout the study, the author engaged in reflexive practices to ensure the participants’ voices and experiences were foregrounded and to mitigate potential biases stemming from their professional and academic background.

Method

We conducted a comparative case-study analysis of the formal classroom LE and the informal NBL environment (Stake, 2005). Data were collected through classroom and nature-based observations, audio recordings in the classroom and video recordings with wearable cameras in nature, focus group interviews, and surveys, providing a comprehensive view of the experiences and interactions of the participants within each environment. Ethical considerations were rigorously addressed, with informed consent obtained from guardians, adult participants, and student assent. By contrasting these environments, the study sought to uncover how the teacher positioned herself and her students in both environments, particularly regarding knowledge authority. This involved exploring how her pedagogy differs between the formal classroom and the nature-based program and how these similarities and differences impacted their subjectification.
Examining these distinct roles, we asked: (1) How does the teacher shift their approach to teaching in the informal nature-based environment compared to the formal classroom LE? (2) How do students respond to and engage with encounters of freedom in the formal classroom LE versus the informal nature-based classroom LE? (3) What role does the social and material context of SOTW play in differently supporting student subject- ness?
Analysis
All audio and video recordings from the classroom and nature-based observations were transcribed verbatim. The transcripts were segmented by turns, as defined by Johnstone (2008). Each segment started when a speaker began talking and ended when either the speaker was interrupted or stopped talking. Transcripts were coded a priori using a Generative Learning Environment Matrix (GLE-Matrix) (Saldaña, 2021). This matrix included codes related to Probing (Bailin & Battersby, 2021), Language and Representation (Fiorella & Mayer, 2016), Knowledge Authority (Suh et al., 2022), and Connections between learners (Lemke, 1990). Probing looks at ways questioning and prompts occur. Language is looking at the type of language used to see who is authoring the language. Knowledge Authority codes indicate the source of knowledge used. Finally, the Connections category looks at the connections students or teachers make between each other and the big ideas in the classroom. While the entire codebook cannot be represented in its entirety, Table 1 highlights the main high-level category codes. These top coding categories are presented with the transcripts in Table 2 to show how this codebook was used.

Table 1
Abbreviated Version of the Generative Learning Matrix

Probing Language Authority  Connections Clarification  Everyday Source Teacher  Past to Present Justification Disciplinary Source Student Small idea to big
idea

Explanation Argument Text, book, other
outside source
Individual to Group

Rhetorical Multimodal  Confirmatory Group to Group Prompt Correction Group to Class
No Response
 Student Choice 

Following transcription and a priori coding, we identified instances of questioning to determine episodes of dialogue for analysis. Questioning can foster dialogue (Bailin & Battersby, 2021), which in turn promotes external authoring of knowledge (Fiorella & Meyer, 2016) and can promote learning (Cavagnetto et al., 2020). A questioning episode began when a question was posed by the teacher or a student and ended when the question was resolved, or the topic shifted. Eighteen episodes were identified. Eight were identified in the classroom, and ten were identified in a nature-based environment. These episodes served as units of analysis to identify themes from the GL-Matrix in each environment (Merriam & Tisdell, 2015; Ramey & Uttal, 2017). Understanding how and when students embrace their subject-ness hinges on the opportunities provided to them (Biesta, 2017). When possible, episodes were also mapped using the Equity Maps app to visualize the dialogue between students and their teacher (Nelson, 2023). Survey data, focus group interviews, and field notes served as sources for confirming and disconfirming evidence.

Findings

RQ1: How does the teacher shift their approach to teaching in the informal nature- based environment compared to the formal classroom?
Ms. Ash demonstrated marked shifts in her teaching approach when transitioning from the formal classroom to the NBL environment. These shifts are evident in several key areas: the structure and dynamics of classroom interactions, the use of probing, and the shift of knowledge authority. Episodes from the classroom included whole group and small group interactions, student presentations, as well as a science experiment involving two students collecting data on the decomposition of carrots. Episodes from nature included hiking, beach exploration, fossil hunting, and open inquiry moments. The episodes we present in Table 2 we argue are representative of each learning environment and highlight one of the shifts Ms. Ash and her students made when transitioning from the classroom to nature. The interactions in Episode 1 between Ms. Ash and the students represent the typical interactions in the classroom. Similarly, Episode 2 depicts Ms. Ash’s shift in knowledge authority and utilizing probing to engage with students. It represents the typical interactions with Ms. Ash at SOTW. The transcripts represent a portion of each episode and were shortened for this paper.

Table 2
Transcripts From Episodes in Each Learning Environment

Classroom Episode 1 Nature Episode 2

Ms. Ash: And the definition is to move forward or progress in the
... (trails off). And it's probably a
Ms. Ash: Where does the water come in from this river? How does this water get rivered?
Probing

lot easier for you to look at your textbooks than it is for you to look up on the screen. Your choice.
Okay. And then we're going to use a sentence right out of the book.
You'll see in the textbook; it has the definition and then it has a sentence. (long pause) And what do you think might be a good reminding word for that? Sean?







Authority Probing
Andrew: The ocean. Language
Ms. Ash: You think it goes all the
way to the ocean? Probing
Andrew: The ocean water comes
back. Language
Ms. Ash: OK. (Pausing for more responses)
Ms. Ash: Oh, OK. What do you
think, Brandon? Probing
Brandon: It comes from the
Sean: Progress. Language
Ms. Ash: Progress. What if people don't know what progress means? What else could be a good word? When people don't know
what progress is about one. Probing
sewage. Language
Ms. Ash: OK, a long time ago, they used to put sewage in rivers. But we don’t do that anymore.
That's against the law now. Thank goodness. Where do you think our

Sean: Advance. Language
6 Ms. Ash: (laughs) Advance.
water comes from? (Calls on student by pointing)
Authority Probing

That’s the word. I mean, I thought we could do progress, or we could... (pauses to think of a
word) Authority
6 Sean: Succeed Language
7 Ms. Ash: Or how about just moving forward? We are just
going to do that one. Authority
(Ms. Ash writes "moving forward"
on the board.) Authority
9 Dallas: Rain. Language
10 Ms. Ash: Yeah. (Gesturing to another student to respond)
11 Mavin: I think you said something about this area used to be all underwater, but it drained down and some of the water is still
here. Language



In the formal classroom, Ms. Ash employed a teacher-centered approach, maintaining authority over knowledge by often having students copy from the text or the board. During her lessons, she relied on direct teaching, asking questions aimed at eliciting predefined answers. For example, in one interaction (Table 2, Episode 1, Line 7), she inserted her own word “moving forward” instead of using a student's suggestion, reinforcing her role as the primary source of knowledge. This approach seemed to position the teacher and text as the sole authorities, limiting opportunities for students to explore their ideas or engage in meaningful dialogue. By prioritizing teacher-driven knowledge over probing student thinking, this approach reduced opportunities for

exploratory dialogue and restricted students' subject-ness. This was similarly seen in other episodes where Ms. Ash positioned either the textbook or herself as the authority of knowledge, leading students to use her language instead of her own.
In another episode where students were asked to draw pictures of ways to remember a vocabulary term, access, Ms. Ash guides them through the picture of drawing a door to represent the word access. During this episode, all students were noted to draw exactly as Ms. Ash drew, apart from one student who drew a “Do Not Enter” sign instead of a door. This marks an example of when students were provided an opportunity to draw and author their own understanding of the word access, they followed Ms. Ash’s knowledge authority.
In contrast, Ms. Ash’s approach at SOTW evolved towards a more dialogic method, where student ideas were the center point of the conversation. Initially, her approach still retained elements of the formal classroom structure, with a focus on delivering information. However, over the three days, Ms. Ash shifted her strategy to incorporate more probing and fostered more opportunities for dialogue and inquiry. This can be seen in Episode 2, where students were gathered in a circle on a beach of an adjacent river. This episode shows Ms. Ash asking more probing questions and taking in more student responses. She spent more time engaging in dialogue with the students to gain their insights on what they knew about watersheds. This dialogue was not seen in any of the classroom episodes. In the classroom she would often only hear from three to five students before moving on. In many of the nature episodes, she allowed more time to hear more student voices.

Table 3
Equity Maps from the Classroom and Nature LEs

Classroom Episode 1 Nature Episode 2
Students
Ms. Ash
Students
Ms. Ash

Students
Ms. Ash
Ms. Ash
Students
Classroom Episode 3 Nature Episode 4

Equity Maps diagrams from Episodes 1 and 2 (Table 3) highlight this shift. The first map, based on a 10- minute classroom discussion about representing a word through a drawing, depicts a teacher-centered interaction. In contrast, the second map, from a 12-minute conversation in nature about watersheds, shows a more dialogical exchange. The pie charts illustrate a reduction in Ms. Ash’s talk time compared to students, reflecting an increased effort to incorporate student ideas into the conversation. While the "ping-pong" nature of these interactions may not fully support students negotiating meaning with one another, it represents a step away from the direct teaching

model she used in the classroom, toward a more dialogic approach. Maps from two more episodes in each environment are also included in Table 3. Episode 3 depicts a lesson where Ms. Ash is leading another discussion on vocabulary terms. Episode 4 shows the map from another watershed lesson that happened on Day Two. In all four episodes, most students are not engaged in dialogue with the teacher in the classroom, but more students are engaged in dialogue in nature-based environment. Although it is possible for students to remain engaged without actively contributing to a discussion, their lack of externalized dialogue makes it challenging to assess their understanding. Without observable contributions or external authoring through dialogue, gauging a student's grasp of understanding becomes difficult.
RQ 2: How do students respond to and engage with encounters of freedom in the formal classroom and the nature-based environment?
The analysis reveals differences in how student subject-ness manifested in both environments. In the formal classroom, where the teacher maintained a more traditional role as the primary authority of knowledge, students were observed to seem more passive, often waiting for direction and validation from the teacher before engaging with the material. The structured nature of the lessons and the emphasis on correct answers limited opportunities for students to exercise or explore their subject-ness. Table 3 shows how, in the classroom LE, very few students were active in the dialogue, leaving a missed opportunity for the teacher to gain insight into what they knew.
The informal, nature-based environment offers a contrast to the more structured classroom settings, providing students with greater opportunities for open dialogue and exploration. In this setting, students encountered numerous moments where they took up their "subject-ness," actively engaging as curious learners. This was evident during a hike, where students' natural curiosity led to deeper inquiry. As they explored their surroundings, they asked more questions, driven by their interests.
A particularly illustrative moment occurred when the students stumbled upon an unusual tree with a giant mushroom growing on it. In this episode, Ms. Ash led them through the discussion without offering her own knowledge of the tree. The students engaged in exploratory dialogue, making observations about their surroundings, such as identifying tree fungi and discussing the potential habitats within a hollow tree. The conversation touched on topics like wild edibles, where SOTW staff emphasized the importance of certainty before consuming anything from nature. Throughout the episode, Ms. Ash encouraged curiosity by prompting the students to consider what might live in the hollow tree and how such formations come to be, suggesting future research opportunities. Ms. Ash’s probing questions prompted students to hypothesize and engage in collaborative problem-solving, showing a moment where they took up their subject-ness. This encounter sparked conversation among the group. At this time, Ms. Ash shifted her knowledge authority to the students. Rather than providing immediate answers, she encouraged them to investigate and discuss their observations. The alignment with student curiosity and Ms. Ash giving up her knowledge authority provided an opportunity for students to take up their subject-ness.
Within SOTW, students embraced their subject-ness, actively taking initiative and expressing curiosity. Nature hikes, beach explorations, and other activities provided them with choices, empowering them to make observations and pose questions of their own. Ms. Ash’s use of open-ended questions, such as “What do you think this is?” or “How does this happen?” further encouraged students to think critically, share ideas, and collaboratively build understanding. These inquiry-based interactions allowed students to move from passive recipients of knowledge to engaged participants, embodying their role as active subjects within the learning process.
RQ 3: What role does the social and material context of SOTW differently support student subject-ness?
The social and material aspects of learning environments can influence how students engage and participate. In many structured classroom settings, the environment is often arranged to reflect authority and control, with desks typically organized in rows and communication flowing primarily from teacher to student. Participation might follow a structured pattern, such as raising hands to speak, which could subtly emphasize correct answers and the teacher's role as the central knowledge authority. In contrast, the nature-based setting at SOTW appeared to offer a more open and flexible space. Without the presence of desks or formal seating arrangements, students seemed to move and interact more freely, with the social dynamics shifting toward collaboration and exploration. Knowledge in this setting was potentially co-constructed through dialogue and shared discovery, suggesting that these less rigid social and material features could help foster a different kind of student engagement.

These contrasting social and material features provide important context for understanding how students perceive the "costs" of participation in each environment. By examining students' experiences and behaviors, we can explore how these settings may influence their willingness to engage in dialogue, share ideas, and exercise their agency in the learning process. In structured classroom environments, participating in dialogue often involves a high perceived cost for students. They may fear social critique or feel apprehensive about the effort required to engage meaningfully in teacher-led discussions (Cavagnetto et al., 2020). For participation to be sustained, the perceived benefits must outweigh these costs. Focus group interviews revealed that students frequently felt uncomfortable sharing ideas in the classroom. One student noted feeling “nervous or embarrassed to be “wrong,” while another student expressed, “In class, it’s like the teacher is always just busy,” suggesting a perceived lack of individual attention and support.
The nature-based setting at SOTW appeared lowered these perceived costs, fostering a more informal atmosphere that encouraged students to participate without fear of judgment. Students felt “taken more seriously in nature” and that “the teacher actually cares,” leading them to feel more open to engaging without waiting to be called upon. One student mentioned that in nature, they could ask peers questions directly without the formality of raising their hand. This shift in behavior suggests that students felt empowered to exercise their “subject-ness” in the nature-based setting, engaging freely with both the teacher and their peers.
The reduction in perceived social and cognitive costs was further evident in specific observational episodes. In Ms. Ash's classroom, students often mirrored her actions—such as copying verbatim what she wrote on the board—indicating a reluctance to deviate from the teacher’s example due to the structured, correct-answer- focused environment. In contrast, SOTW highlighted a shift in authority, with students confidently initiating dialogue, asking questions, and making independent observations without the fear of immediate correction or social critique. This informal setting encouraged students to engage in dialogue-driven learning, suggesting that lowering perceived costs through a nature-based environment can significantly enhance student participation and agency.

Discussion
This study suggests that informal, nature-based learning environments offer unique opportunities for fostering student subjectification. By comparing these settings with traditional classrooms, the research provides insights into how knowledge authority and dialogic pedagogy can shape learning experiences that allow students to engage more actively with their subject-ness. The findings contribute to the ongoing discussion of generative learning environments (GLEs) by exploring how material and social contexts influence the roles of teachers and students. Ms. Ash’s pedagogical shift from a teacher-centered model in the formal classroom to a dialogic approach in the nature-based environment supports Biesta’s (2017) framework of subjectification. Biesta posits that education should enable students to become autonomous, critically thinking individuals who engage meaningfully with the world. While this study does not entirely address these concepts, it does illustrate how the informal NBL encouraged students to engage more in dialogue and explore their curiosity. By promoting a dialogic rather than monologic teaching approach, SOTW reduced barriers to student participation and enhanced their subject-ness. This supports the findings involving student participation and the cost-benefit ratio in the
formal classroom and contributes to the findings in an informal context (Cavagnetto et al., 2020).
Future studies could examine the interplay between knowledge authority, subjectification, and dialogue across various informal contexts. Mann et al. (2022) highlighted the need for comparative analyses between traditional and informal learning settings, and this study begins to address that gap. Future research could explore how other informal environments, such as museums or community spaces, similarly support student autonomy and engagement. Additionally, longitudinal research could assess the long-term impact of informal learning experiences on students’ academic and personal development, offering deeper insights into how such environments contribute to sustained learning outcomes.

References
Bailin, S., & Battersby, M. (2021). Is There a Role for Adversariality in Teaching Critical Thinking? Topoi, 40(5), 951–961. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11245-020-09713-2
Biesta, G. (2017). Don’t be fooled by ignorant schoolmasters: On the role of the teacher in emancipatory education. Policy Futures in Education, 15(1), 52–73. https://doi.org/10.1177/1478210316681202
Cavagnetto, A. R., Hand, B., & Premo, J. (2020). Supporting student agency in science. Theory Into Practice, 59(2), 128–138. https://doi.org/10.1080/00405841.2019.1702392
Chen, Y.-C., Hand, B., & Norton-Meier, L. (2017). Teacher Roles of Questioning in Early Elementary Science Classrooms: A Framework Promoting Student Cognitive Complexities in Argumentation. Research in Science Education, 47(2), 373–405. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11165-015-9506-6

Fiorella, L., & Mayer, R. E. (2016). Eight Ways to Promote Generative Learning. Educational Psychology Review, 28(4), 717–741. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10648-015-9348-9
Giroux, H. A. (2010). Paulo Freire and the Crisis of the Political. Power and Education, 2(3), 335–340. https://doi.org/10.2304/power.2010.2.3.335
Grunzke, A. (2019). The History of Nonformal and Informal Education. In J. L. Rury & E. H. Tamura (Eds.), The [Oxford] Handbook of the History of Education (pp. 538–553). Oxford University Press. https://doi.org/10.1093/oxfordhb/9780199340033.013.32
Hand, B., & Cavagnetto, A. (2023). Brian’s life is not just another brick in the wall: Reframing the metaphor of science teaching. Journal of Curriculum and Pedagogy, 1–15. https://doi.org/10.1080/15505170.2023.2284711
Hand, B., Chen, Y.-C., & Suh, J. K. (2021). Does a Knowledge Generation Approach Learning Benefit Students? A Systematic Review of Research on the Science Writing Heuristic Approach. Educational Psychology Review, 33(2), 535–577. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10648-020-09550-0
Hooks, Bell. (1994). Teaching to transgress: Education as the practice of freedom. Routledge Taylor & Francis Group.
Lammert, C., Hand, B., Suh, J. K., & Fulmer, G. (2022). “It’s all in the moment”: A mixed-methods study of elementary science teacher adaptiveness following professional development on knowledge generation approaches. Disciplinary and Interdisciplinary Science Education Research, 4(1), 12. https://doi.org/10.1186/s43031-022-00052-3
Lemke, J. L. (1990). Talking science: Language, learning, and values. Ablex Pub. Corp.
Link, M. W. (2023). Connecting Children to Nature Through Scientific Inquiry: The Impact on Children’s Well- Being. In C. D. Tippett & T. M. Milford (Eds.), Exploring Elementary Science Teaching and Learning in Canada (Vol. 53, pp. 167–186). Springer International Publishing. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031- 23936-6_10
Lowell, B. R., Fogelman, S. E., & McNeill, K. L. (2024). Organizational sensemaking during curriculum implementation: The dilemma of agency, role of collaboration, and importance of discipline‐specific leadership. Science Education, 108(5), 1448–1473. https://doi.org/10.1002/sce.21885
Mann, J., Gray, T., Truong, S., Brymer, E., Passy, R., Ho, S., Sahlberg, P., Ward, K., Bentsen, P., Curry, C., & Cowper, R. (2022). Getting Out of the Classroom and Into Nature: A Systematic Review of Nature- Specific Outdoor Learning on School Children’s Learning and Development. Frontiers in Public Health, 10, 877058. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpubh.2022.877058
Matusov, E., Dyuke, K. von, & Han, S. (2013). Community of Learners: Ontological and non-ontological projects.
Outlines. Critical Practice Studies, 14(1), 41–72. https://doi.org/10.7146/ocps.v14i1.6062
Mayer, F. S., & Frantz, C. M. (2004). The connectedness to nature scale: A measure of individuals’ feeling in community with nature. Journal of Environmental Psychology, 24(4), 503–515. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvp.2004.10.001
Merriam, S. B., & Tisdell, E. J. (2015). Qualitative research: A guide to design and implementation (Fourth edition). John Wiley & Sons. https://doi.org/10.1111/ssm.12189
Nelson, D. I. (2023). Pedagogical Approaches and the Role of Equity Maps in Dialogic Pedagogy with Adolescent Learners.
Osborne, R., & Wittrock, M. (1985). The Generative Learning Model and its Implications for Science Education.
Studies in Science Education, 12(1), 59–87. https://doi.org/10.1080/03057268508559923
Pace, J. L., & Hemmings, A. (2007). Understanding Authority in Classrooms: A Review of Theory, Ideology, and Research. Review of Educational Research, 77(1), 4–27. https://doi.org/10.3102/003465430298489
Ramey, K. E., & Uttal, D. H. (2017). Making Sense of Space: Distributed Spatial Sensemaking in a Middle School Summer Engineering Camp. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 26(2), 277–319. https://doi.org/10.1080/10508406.2016.1277226
Robinson, K. (2001). Mind the gap: The creative conundrum. Critical Quarterly, 43(1), 41–45. https://doi.org/10.1111/1467-8705.00335
Saldaña, J. (2021). The coding manual for qualitative researchers (4E [Fourth edition]). SAGE Publishing Inc. Stake, R. E. (2005). Qualitative Case Studies. In N. K. Denzin & Y. S. Lincoln (Eds.) (3rd ed.). Sage Publications.
Suh, J. K., Hwang, J., Park, S., & Hand, B. (2022). Epistemic orientation toward teaching science for knowledge generation: Conceptualization and validation of the construct. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, tea.21769. https://doi.org/10.1002/tea.21769
UI WILD- The University of Iowa. (2022).
Wagner, T. (2014). The Global Achievement Gap (1st edition). Basic Books.