Replicating the Effectiveness of Sensemaking-Focused Pedagogies
Tanmay Sinha, National Institute of Education, Nanyang Technological University, tanmay.sinha@nie.edu.sg Manu Kapur, Professorship for Learning Sciences and Higher Education, ETH Zurich, manukapur@ethz.ch
Abstract: Two hundred and twenty three tenth grade students engaged in one of four preparatory activities – problem solving, worked examples, sensemaking, and contrasting cases—before receiving instruction on the targeted concept of standard deviation. Students in the problem solving condition performed the best on items targeting understanding of the critical features of the concept, whereas those in the worked example condition performed the worst. Consistent with our hypotheses, there was a significant difference between preparatory problem-solving and worked examples on conceptual understanding and transfer assessments, but not on procedural knowledge. Notably, sensemaking (making sense of a correct solution without any explanation) triggered students’ knowledge gap awareness and curiosity significantly greater than all the other conditions, even though outcome performance was not different from the worked examples condition. Finally, studying contrasting cases as preparation led to superior performance on transfer assessments compared to worked examples. Against the backdrop of implementing resource-efficient learning designs in the classroom, our work provides solid empirical evidence to guide educators in their teaching efforts.

Introduction
Educators want their students to develop good understanding of domain-specific ideas, why these ideas work for certain problems, and how can these ideas be applied to novel, but related problems in the future. Several pedagogical genres have been proposed to foster students’ conceptual understanding and transfer (Kapur, 2016), most notable among which is the highly intuitive and widely-practiced instruction-first format – here, educators typically introduce students to formal concepts of a domain in a clear and well-structured manner, and only subsequently provide problem-solving opportunities as practice. However, “when telling occurs without readiness, the primary recourse for students is to treat the new information as ends to be memorized rather than as tools to help them perceive and think” (Schwartz & Bransford, 1998, p. 477). Therefore, alternatively, an instruction-first sequence can be flipped to use problem-solving first as a preparation for learning from follow-up lecture. Rather than deemphasizing educator explanations, such a constructivist pedagogy starts by providing active sensemaking experiences for students that can be used to create a time for telling. Effectively creating such experiences sits at heart of the broader design paradigm of preparation for future learning (PFL), which is the focus of our current work.
Any sensemaking-focused preparatory activity should minimally help students activate and differentiate their prior knowledge in relation to the targeted concept, which can create conceptual hooks for knowledge integration and assembly (Kapur & Bielaczyc, 2012). By engaging in a process of generating and testing hypotheses, manipulating numerical or graphical representations and constructing data-driven reflections, students are likely to recognize deep features of the underlying problem and their knowledge insufficiency (Loibl et al., 2017). Although this can create discomfort, engaging in a well-designed preparatory activity can make students curious and more ready to know the canonical answer when presented in instruction later (Lamnina & Chase, 2019; Sinha & Kapur, 2021b). However, designing for learning in ways that invokes these underlying mechanisms is a challenging task. There is limited empirical research that directly compares the relative efficacy of different preparatory activities for whom there exists rigorous studies of their impressive, but isolated effects on learning. That is precisely where our current study comes in. Using well-established learning materials, we build on former work by Trninic et al. (2022) to replicate and better understand boundary conditions of four preparatory activities that hold strong potential to improve students’ readiness to learn. Our results hold implications for evidence-backed preparatory activities that teachers can implement within classroom constraints.
Theoretical background
Preparation for future learning
As a pedagogical design, PFL refers to a broad class of learning activities that hold the potential to increase students’ readiness to learn from follow-up instruction (Sinha & Kapur, 2021a). Such activities can range from problem-solving, problem-posing, solution evaluation and/or ranking to worked example presentation and text comprehension (Sinha & Kapur, 2021c). Originally conceived in the seminal work from Schwartz & Bransford

(1998) and strengthened with further empirical evidence in Schwartz & Martin (2004), PFL was positioned as a learning approach that balances efficiency and fluency (typically, the focus of direct instruction routines) with innovation and generation (typically, the focus of problem-based learning approaches). By merely delaying formal instruction to incorporate a sensemaking-focused activity prior to it, students showed superior performance on assessments of conceptual understanding and transfer. This necessitated rethinking about a formalisms-first view of learning (Nathan, 2012), and accelerated the development of concrete pedagogical designs such as productive failure (Kapur, 2008). Each PFL activity brings with it certain tradeoffs that can affect its differential effectiveness in situations of learning, which we discuss in more detail next.
Efficacy tradeoffs of preparatory designs for learning
One of the most common preparatory activity involves problem-solving prior to instruction (Loibl et al., 2017), as exemplified in the productive failure design (Kapur & Bielaczyc, 2012; Sinha & Kapur, 2021a). Self-generating solutions to a novel problem activates prerequisite prior knowledge and helps students gain a better understanding of the problem-space. When situated within the appropriate socio-cultural norms, trying and failing brings attention to critical task features and increases exposure to one’s own knowledge gaps. However, despite the empirical efficacy of the necessity of failure for the design of initial learning (Sinha et al., 2021; Sinha & Kapur, 2020b; Thorgeirsson et al., 2022), experiencing failures may still temporarily trigger potentially desirable but undesired negative affect (Sinha, 2022), and may thus not be well received (Pan et al., 2020). There is also a chance that students’ stickiness to suboptimal ways of problem-solving and valuing self-generated products highly may make them reluctant towards learning from the canonical solution (Gick & Holyoak, 1987).
The use of worked examples as a preparatory activity on the other hand, is likely to lower failure likelihood and alleviate the burden on limited working memory capacity, as advocated by proponents of cognitive load theory (Sweller et al., 2019). However, simply presenting an illustration and explanation of interrelated problem steps does not guarantee that novices will make sense of it and engage in deep processing with the canonical solution. In fact, the literature on preparation for future learning (Kapur, 2016) would suggest quite the opposite, where insufficient opportunities for prior knowledge activation via a worked example may constrain opportunities for knowledge integration and assembly during instruction.
Sensemaking with a pre-designed canonical solution is another potentially strong preparatory alternative. When deliberately designed to withhold any stepwise explanation, such an activity more closely fulfils the important pre-instructional goal of increasing students’ awareness of what works and what does not. When students analyze problem data against a presented solution and construct interpretations of why each step works the way it does, they may draw on their intuitive thinking and align it with the presented formalisms, thereby increasing the chances of engaging in deeper processing of critical task features. Note that our usage of sensemaking contrasts typical PFL studies where students evaluate pre-designed, but suboptimal solutions, which are in turn meant to provide vicarious failure learning opportunities (e.g., Kapur, 2014a; Hartmann et al., 2022).
Finally, the use of contrasting cases as a preparatory activity shifts the focus from evaluating a single solution to comparing the similarities and differences between two solutions. When such contrasts are created by incorporating a canonical and a suboptimal solution, students have greater opportunities to begin noticing what separates the critical task features from surface features of the problem (Schwartz et al., 2011). By bypassing self- generation and directly proceeding to contrast two solutions, classroom resources such as student and teacher time can be better managed. However, students may end up merely noticing what they already know and compare familiar task features, which can limit learning from contrasting cases (Chase et al., 2019).
Prior study by Trninic, Sinha and Kapur (2022)
The study by Trninic et al. (2022) compared the effectiveness of the aforementioned preparatory activities for learning standard deviation in non-novice (undergraduate) students. These activities asked students to either self- generate solutions, study a fully worked-out solution, make sense of a canonical but unexplained solution, or compare a canonical with a suboptimal solution prior to instruction. Posttest results showed no significant and practically meaningful differences between the four preparatory activities. One explanation for this null result was attributed to the nature of the studied sample that possessed relatively higher expertise, thereby diluting effects. Another strand of explanation relied on the inclusion of an identical intermediate assessment between the preparation and the instructional phase, which may have leveled the preparation effects. Here, we tested the generalizability of these predictions by (i) administering the study on a new novice student population, who are more likely to benefit from such preparatory activities (Sinha & Kapur, 2021a; Sinha & Kapur, 2021c), but still
(ii) keeping the intermediate formative assessment in the study design to evaluate the extent to which novice students notice critical task features prior to instruction. This not only allowed us to align more closely with effective classroom practice because of the translational relevance of formative assessments but also provided an

interesting theoretical opportunity to know whether the initial preparation already begins affording learning opportunities. Contrary to implications from prior work such as “learning is assumed to take place not during the initial problem-solving phase, but rather during the subsequent instruction” (Hartmann et al., 2020, p. 881), we contend that is not the case because learning is something people do, not something that happens to them.
Method
Participants
After obtaining informed consent from students and their parents, N = 227 lower secondary (grade 10, age 15-16) students from a high-achieving school in the national capital region of India took part in the study. The recruitment protocol ensured that students had not been taught the targeted concept of standard deviation before the study. N
= 4 records had to be excluded because of incomplete information, resulting in a final sample size of N = 223 with good gender balance. Given that we did not have much leeway for increasing our sample size, an ANCOVA- based sensitivity power analysis suggested that we could reliably detect an effect of d = 0.4 with 70% power.
Classroom study design
Following in-vivo experimentation, students were randomly assigned to one of the four study conditions based on the preparatory activity they started with (see Figure 1). The first condition, Productive Failure (N = 62), asked students to freely generate multiple solutions to solve a mathematical task. The second condition, Worked Example (N = 54), asked students to study a canonical step-by-step solution to the mathematical task. The third condition, Sensemaking (N = 46), withheld any explanations and asked students to explain why a presented canonical formula works as a solution to the mathematical task. The fourth and final condition, Contrasting Cases (N = 61), presented the canonical formula along with a suboptimal formula and asked students to explain which of the two formulae works better as the solution to the mathematical task. Students were asked to give their best since effort counted more than getting the answer correct. Teacher facilitators were instructed to not provide any hint or solution.

Figure 1
Study Design. The Problem-Solving Followed by Instruction is Henceforth Rreferred to as Productive Failure.

After going through one of the four preparatory activities, students answered a brief intuitions assessment meant to tap on whether they had noticed and understood critical task features. Time for this assessment was intentionally low to discourage procedural computation. The twelve items used for this intermediate assessment were drawn from the conceptual understanding and transfer dimensions of the posttest. Subsequently, all students went through an identical instructional phase where common suboptimal solutions were compared and contrasted, following pedagogical guidelines for effective preparation for learning (Loibl et al., 2017; Sinha & Kapur, 2021a).
Questionnaires following a five-point Likert scale were used to tap onto (i) incoming profile of students via measurements of their learning goal orientation (끫뷸 = 0.77, e.g., “the opportunity to do challenging work is important to me”, “I try hard to improve on my past performance”) and attitude towards mistakes (끫뷸 = 0.61, e.g., “when I make mistakes, I am afraid that others look down upon me”, “I believe it is smart to avoid making mistakes during learning”), at the beginning of the study, along with (ii) learning mechanisms triggered by the different preparatory activities via measurements of their knowledge gap awareness (끫뷸 = 0.86, e.g., “my

knowledge was insufficient to carry out these tasks”, “I felt that I did not manage to complete these tasks”), state curiosity (끫뷸 = 0.82, e.g., “I want to know more”, “I feel like asking questions about what is happening”), germane cognitive load (끫뷸 = 0.89, e.g., “this activity improved my understanding of the content that was covered”, “this activity improved my knowledge of how to deal with the problem covered), positive and negative affect (assessed via the PANAS scale, Watson et al., 1988), in between the preparation and the instructional phases. Although the choice of these questionnaires follows directly from Trninic et al., 2022, all scales have been validated across multiple prior empirical studies (e.g., Loibl & Rummel, 2014; Glogger-Frey et al., 2017; Lamnina & Chase, 2019; Sinha et al., 2021; Sinha & Kapur 2021b). Finally, students worked on a posttest comprising two items for procedural understanding, six items (fifteen sub-items) for conceptual understanding and four items (five sub- items) assessing transfer. The conceptual understanding items probed students with questions on rank-ordering and transformations (e.g., how does standard deviation change when each data point is multiplied by 5). The transfer items assessed students’ understanding of normalization using numerical and graphical representations.
Learning materials
All learning materials were adapted from Kapur (2014b). During the preparatory activity, students were presented with the goal scoring records of two soccer players in an 11-year period and a challenge statement of mathematically determining the more consistent player. Consistency was defined as scoring goals as evenly as possible. With the same basic problem setup, only the engagement instructions for each condition differed. The instructional phase and the posttest items were drawn directly from Trninic et al., 2022, which were originally adaptations of Kapur (2014b).
Research questions and hypotheses
We proposed the following research questions and explanatory hypotheses for the current study.

RQ1: How do different preparatory activities facilitate the ability to notice critical features prior to instruction?
H1: Students in the Productive Failure condition would score the highest and those in the Worked Example condition would score the lowest on the intermediate intuitions assessment. Students in the Sensemaking and Contrasting Cases conditions would fall in-between these two conditions.

RQ2: What is the differential impact of different preparatory activities on procedural understanding?
H2a: Students in the Productive Failure condition would score similar or lower than those in the Worked Example condition on posttest items assessing procedural understanding.

H2b: Students in the Worked Example condition would score higher than students in the Sensemaking
and Contrasting Cases conditions on posttest items assessing procedural understanding.
RQ3: What is the differential impact of different preparatory activities on conceptual understanding?

H3a: The gap between students in the Productive Failure condition relative to the Worked Example condition would increase for posttest items assessing conceptual understanding relative to those assessing procedural understanding (in favor of the Productive Failure condition).
H3b: Students in the Sensemaking and Contrasting Cases conditions would score similar or higher than students in the Worked Example condition on posttest items assessing conceptual understanding.

RQ4: What is the differential impact of different preparatory activities on transfer of learning?
H4a: The gap between students in the Productive Failure condition relative to the Worked Example condition would increase for posttest items assessing transfer relative to those assessing both procedural and conceptual understanding (in favor of the Productive Failure condition).

H4b: Students in the Sensemaking and Contrasting Cases conditions would score similar or higher than students in the Worked Example condition on posttest items assessing transfer.
RQ5: How are learning mechanisms differentially triggered across the different preparatory activities?

H5a: All the learning mechanisms would be triggered to a similar or higher extent for students in the Sensemaking condition relative to the remaining three alternative ways of preparation, that is, Productive Failure, Worked Example, and Contrasting Cases.
H5b: All the learning mechanisms would be triggered to a similar or higher extent for students in the
Productive Failure and Contrasting Cases condition relative to those in the Worked Example condition.
Analysis plan
We performed two manipulation checks to assess study design fidelity. First, to assess failure rates, prototypical of preparatory designs for learning, we graded the quality of student products prior to instruction on a scale from 0 (incorrect) to 4 (canonically correct). For Productive Failure, Sensemaking and Contrasting Cases conditions, one point was awarded for using or acknowledging (i) deviations as a measure of consistency, (ii) measuring deviations from a central tendency, (iii) combining deviations by summing positive (absolute value or squared) deviations, and (iv) dividing by the number of data points. Only the best among the multiple generated solutions were coded for students in the Productive Failure condition. Students in the Worked Example condition were excluded from this analysis owing to lack of any required production. Second, we coded the quantity of produced solutions for students in the Productive Failure condition, a core design principle (Sinha & Kapur, 2021a).
To assess the differential impact of the four preparatory activities on learning, we conducted four ANCOVAs with either scores from the intermediate intuitions assessment, or posttest scores of procedural understanding, conceptual understanding and transfer as dependent variables, experimental condition as the fixed factor and students’ learning goal orientation and attitude towards mistakes as covariates. To further assess the strength of the learning mechanisms triggered by the four preparatory activities, we conducted five different ANOVAs with either students’ knowledge gap awareness, state curiosity, germane cognitive load, positive affect or negative affect as dependent variables, and experimental condition as the fixed factor. Planned contrasts were carried out wherever applicable. Where equality between conditions was hypothesized, null hypothesis significance tests were complemented with Bayes Factor (BF01) to highlight the strength of evidence favoring the null hypothesis (1). Cohen’s d interpreted in the context of relevant informative prior literature was used to assess practical significance of results (2).
Results
Manipulation checks
As expected, students in the Productive Failure (M = 0.90, SE = 0.10), Sensemaking (M = 0.69, SE = 0.20) and Contrasting Cases (M = 0.25, SE = 0.10) conditions had low solution quality, suggesting that the majority of student-generated products were highly suboptimal or not canonically correct. Further, students in the Productive Failure condition did generate multiple solutions (M = 1.62, SE = 0.15, max = 7).
Learning
Table 1 summarizes the assessment scores for all four preparatory conditions. Our investigation of RQ1 revealed that students in the Productive Failure condition scored the highest on the intermediate intuitions assessment relative to the Worked Example (d = 0.52), Sensemaking (d = 0.29) and Contrasting Cases (d = 0.33) conditions. We further found similar scores on the intuitions assessment for students across the Sensemaking and Contrasting Cases conditions (d = 0.04, BF01 = 4.83), with both these conditions outperforming the Worked Example condition (d = 0.23 and d = 0.19 respectively). Taken together, these results support H1.
Our investigation of RQ2 revealed that students in the Productive Failure condition scored similar to those in the Worked Example condition (d = 0.02, BF01 = 5.0) on the posttest items assessing procedural understanding. This result supports H2a. We further found that the Worked Example condition outperformed both the Sensemaking (d = 0.15) and Contrasting Cases (d = 0.25) conditions. This result supports H2b.
Our investigation of RQ3 revealed that the gap between the Productive Failure and Worked Example condition on conceptual understanding posttest items (d = 0.16) did increase 8x in the expected direction relative to procedural understanding items (d = 0.02). This result supports H3a. We further found that withholding an explanation of the canonical solution in the Sensemaking condition was just as effective as providing a completely worked out solution as preparation in the Worked Example condition (d = 0.05, BF01 = 4.32) on the conceptual understanding items. However, unexpectedly, students in the Contrasting Cases condition scored lower than those in the Worked Example condition (d = 0.27). Taken together, these results only partially support H3b.
Our investigation of RQ4 revealed that the gap between the Productive Failure and Worked Example
condition on transfer posttest items (d = 0.21) did increase 1.3x in the expected direction relative to conceptual

understanding items (d = 0.16) and 10.5x relative to procedural understanding posttest items (d = 0.02). This result supports H4a. Aligning with the results for RQ3, we further found that students in the Sensemaking condition scored similar to the Worked Example condition on transfer items (d = 0.10, BF01 = 3.90). In line with our hypothesis and contrary to the results of RQ3 though, students in the Worked Example condition were however surpassed by the Contrasting Cases condition (d = 0.14). Taken together, these results support H4b.

Table 1
Marginal Mean (standard error) of Assessment Scores across Conditions

Intuitions assessment
Procedural understanding posttest
Conceptual understanding posttest
Transfer posttest
(max = 12)
(max = 2)
(max = 15)
(max = 5)
Productive Failure
5.17 (0.27)
1.45 (0.09)
5.80 (0.38)
1.64 (0.15)
Worked Example
4.06 (0.30)
1.44 (0.10)
5.30 (0.42)
1.40 (0.16)
Sensemaking
4.56 (0.32)
1.33 (0.11)
5.15 (0.46)
1.27 (0.18)
Contrasting Cases
4.47 (0.28)
1.27 (0.09)
4.48 (0.39)
1.56 (0.15)

Learning mechanisms
Table 2 describes the self-reported scores on the learning mechanism questionnaires. Our investigation of RQ5 showed that with the exception of germane cognitive load (d = -0.15, -0.32, -0.26), the Sensemaking condition did indeed perform similarly or strongly surpassed all three alternative ways of preparation, that is, Productive Failure, Worked Example, and Contrasting Cases, on the triggered learning mechanisms of knowledge gap awareness (d = 1.40, 1.15, 1.53), state curiosity (d = 0.40, 0.50, 0.52), positive affect (d = 0.07, 0.11, 0.12; BF01
= 4.56, 4.06, 4.06) and negative affect (d = 0.56, 0.43, 0.28). These results partially support H5a. Using planned contrasts {1, 1, -2} between the Productive Failure and Contrasting Cases conditions on the one hand and the Worked Example condition on the other hand, we further found no significant differences among any of the triggered learning mechanisms (all p’s > 0.05) along with strong evidence favoring the null (all BF01’s > 3 except for knowledge gap awareness with BF01 = 1.06). This result does not support H5b.
Table 2
Mean (standard error) of Questionnaire Sscores for Learning Mechanisms across Conditions (max = 5)

Knowledge gap awareness
State curiosity
Germane cognitive load
Positive affect
Negative affect
Productive Failure
2.73 (0.12)
3.64 (0.09)
3.33 (0.12)
3.31 (0.11)
1.83 (0.09)
Worked Example
2.97 (0.14)
3.57 (0.12)
3.51 (0.15)
3.35 (0.13)
1.93 (0.09)
Sensemaking
4.10 (0.13)
3.97 (0.11)
3.17 (0.15)
3.25 (0.13)
2.26 (0.12)
Contrasting Cases
2.60 (0.13)
3.55 (0.12)
3.44 (0.14)
3.36 (0.13)
2.05 (0.11)

Discussion and conclusion
We implemented a high fidelity study to assess the differential efficacy of four preparatory activities on procedural, conceptual and transfer learning. Building on former empirical work by Trninic et al. (2022), we investigated whether the null results reported for a non-novice (undergraduate) population may still hold for a lower secondary student population for whom the learning materials are more suitable. Drawing on former work, we laid down several explanatory hypotheses disfavoring the null and found empirical evidence in support of these hypotheses. Our results for RQ1 clearly showed that by generating suboptimal solutions to a problem- solving task prior to the lecture, students can develop a better intuition regarding critical task features within a short time-frame. This was evidenced by scores on the rapid time-bound assessment administered in-between the preparation and the instructional phases. Short generation and evaluation-focused activities may therefore have a lot of practical relevance for educators. Despite heavily structuring student understanding and reducing cognitive load, showing a fully-explained worked example was unfortunately insufficient as a preparation for future learning. However, our results for RQ2 did suggest that despite poor performance on the intuitions assessment, when students in the Worked Example condition were exposed to follow-up instruction, they did perform well on

posttest assessments of procedural understanding. The redundancy of learning opportunities for these students across the preparation and instructional phases may have facilitated fluent isomorphic performance. Atypically, we also found that engaging in Productive Failure did not hurt procedural understanding, especially relative to worked example presentation. This means that there may be plausible alternatives to worked examples that teachers can consider, even when there is a greater priority on fluency-building for certain topics.
Our results for RQ3 and RQ4 further supplemented these results by showing an increasingly greater relative efficacy of problem-solving over worked examples, when moving to posttests of conceptual understanding and transfer. These results align with meta-analytic evidence on learning outcomes for which Productive Failure designs are typically effective (Sinha & Kapur, 2021a). The relatively less intense and practically less time-consuming Sensemaking alternative, despite not surpassing Productive Failure was still equivalent to the Worked Examples condition on these higher-order assessments. Results from RQ5 help in better understanding the underlying tradeoffs that maybe at play here – students’ higher awareness of knowledge gaps along with their curiosity to know more about the canonical answer and temporarily induced negative affect may have been counterbalanced with the relatively lower germane cognitive load. Students, who are often poor assessors of the effectiveness of engaging in effortful learning activities (Pan et al., 2020), clearly under- appreciated the contribution of the sensemaking activity to their task understanding, which may have in turn dampened strong learning effects that we posited. Taken together though, this again indicates that there are equally strong preparatory alternatives to worked example presentation, which despite not resulting in greater conceptual understanding or transfer learning, may still hold collateral benefits in terms of triggering rich learning mechanisms that could aid future learning.
The trend of relatively more effortful preparatory activities outperforming worked example presentation was also seen for students in the Contrasting Cases condition, especially for the transfer posttest (RQ4). Contrasting the optimal solution (standard deviation) with a suboptimal solution (year-on-year deviations, in our case) affords contextual flexibility for encoding and assembly of potential functional components required to understand deviations (e.g., the data point, differences from an (aggregated) data point, division by sample size). This may, in turn, facilitate flexible reassembly of these components required to solve transfer problems on normalization. More generally, forcing comparison necessitates active cognitive engagement, encourages students to think about the underlying reasons that make one solution superior to the other, facilitates awareness of flaws in the suboptimal solution, and stimulates critical thinking necessary for applying learnt concepts in new contexts (Schwartz et al., 2011). However, despite these posited learning benefits, we found Contrasting Cases to also surprisingly be relatively less effective on the conceptual understanding posttest items. One explanation could be that because the contrast between our optimal and the chosen suboptimal solution was low, it may have made noticing the significance or relevance of each functional component for deriving the canonical solution hard (Shemwell et al., 2015), thus adversely affecting posttest problem-solving focusing on sensemaking with standard deviation directly. More future work is required to probe into evidence supporting this explanation.
Altogether, our results introduce a range of sensemaking-focused pedagogies, each differing in their practical applicability to classrooms, and provide empirical evidence that advances our understanding of when and why these pedagogies work. When interpreted in the light of meta-analytic evidence (Sinha & Kapur, 2021c), the majority of our effect sizes surpass or fall close to g = 0.22, indicating that we can achieve stronger and more sustainable effects with rigorous replication. Despite high ecological validity, our study is limited because of the focus on STEM topics for a plausibly high-achieving (but novice!) demographic. With increasing emphasis on learning across the lifespan where re-skilling will become all the more important, we encourage future work to expand and test the efficacy of different ways of preparing individuals for future learning across diverse socio- cultural contexts and a range of STEM and non-STEM topics with varying degrees of complexity.

Endnotes
BF01 > 3 reflects strong odds favoring the null hypothesis.
Meta-analytic work (Sinha & Kapur, 2021c), which showed a moderate but non-significant effect of problem-solving as preparation relative to alternative preparatory activities (g = 0.22), was used as a comparative basis for evaluation.

References
Chase, C. C., Malkiewich, L., & S Kumar, A. (2019). Learning to notice science concepts in engineering activities and transfer situations. Science Education, 103(2), 440-471.
Gick, M. L., & Holyoak, K. J. (1987). The cognitive basis of knowledge transfer. In Transfer of learning (pp. 9- 46). Academic Press.
Glogger-Frey, I., Gaus, K., & Renkl, A. (2017). Learning from direct instruction: Best prepared by several self- regulated or guided invention activities?. Learning and Instruction, 51, 26-35.

Hartmann, C., van Gog, T., & Rummel, N. (2020). Do examples of failure effectively prepare students for learning from subsequent instruction?. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 34(4), 879-889.
Hartmann, C., van Gog, T., & Rummel, N. (2022). Productive versus vicarious failure: Do students need to fail themselves in order to learn?. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 36(6), 1219-1233.
Kapur, M., & Bielaczyc, K. (2012). Designing for productive failure. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 21(1), 45- 83.
Kapur, M. (2008). Productive failure. Cognition and Instruction, 26(3), 379-424.
Kapur, M. (2014a). Comparing learning from productive failure and vicarious failure. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 23(4), 651-677.
Kapur, M. (2014b). Productive failure in learning math. Cognitive Science, 38(5), 1008-1022.
Kapur, M. (2016). Examining productive failure, productive success, unproductive failure, and unproductive success in learning. Educational Psychologist, 51(2), 289-299.
Lamnina, M., & Chase, C. C. (2019). Developing a thirst for knowledge: How uncertainty in the classroom influences curiosity, affect, learning, and transfer. Contemporary Educational Psychology, 59, 101785.
Loibl, K., Roll, I., & Rummel, N. (2017). Towards a theory of when and how problem solving followed by instruction supports learning. Educational Psychology Review, 29, 693-715.
Loibl, K., & Rummel, N. (2014). Knowing what you don't know makes failure productive. Learning and Instruction, 34, 74-85.
Nathan, M. J. (2012). Rethinking formalisms in formal education. Educational Psychologist, 47(2), 125-148. Pan, S. C., Sana, F., Samani, J., Cooke, J., & Kim, J. A. (2020). Learning from errors: Students’ and instructors’
practices, attitudes, and beliefs. Memory, 28(9), 1105-1122.
Schwartz, D. L., & Bransford, J. D. (1998). A time for telling. Cognition and Instruction, 16(4), 475-5223.
Schwartz, D. L., & Martin, T. (2004). Inventing to prepare for future learning: The hidden efficiency of encouraging original student production in statistics instruction. Cognition and Instruction, 22(2), 129- 184.
Schwartz, D. L., Chase, C. C., Oppezzo, M. A., & Chin, D. B. (2011). Practicing versus inventing with contrasting cases: The effects of telling first on learning and transfer. Journal of Educational Psychology, 103(4), 759.
Shemwell, J. T., Chase, C. C., & Schwartz, D. L. (2015). Seeking the general explanation: A test of inductive activities for learning and transfer. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 52(1), 58-83.
Sinha, T., & Kapur, M. (2021a). When problem solving followed by instruction works: Evidence for productive failure. Review of Educational Research, 91(5), 761-798.
Sinha, T., & Kapur, M. (2021b). Robust effects of the efficacy of explicit failure-driven scaffolding in problem- solving prior to instruction: A replication and extension. Learning and Instruction, 75, 101488.
Sinha, T., & Kapur, M. (2021c). From problem-solving to sensemaking: A comparative meta-analysis of preparatory approaches for future learning. EdArxiv
Sinha, T., Kapur, M., West, R., Catasta, M., Hauswirth, M., & Trninic, D. (2021). Differential benefits of explicit failure-driven and success-driven scaffolding in problem-solving prior to instruction. Journal of Educational Psychology, 113(3), 530-555.
Sinha, T. (2022). Enriching problem-solving followed by instruction with explanatory accounts of emotions.
Journal of the Learning Sciences, 31(2), 151-198.
Sweller, J., van Merriënboer, J. J., & Paas, F. (2019). Cognitive architecture and instructional design: 20 years later. Educational Psychology Review, 31, 261-292.
Thorgeirsson, S., Sinha, T., Friedrich, F., & Su, Z. (2022). Does deliberately failing improve learning in introductory computer science?. In European Conference on Technology Enhanced Learning (pp. 608- 614). Cham: Springer International Publishing.
Trninic, D., Sinha, T., & Kapur, M. (2022). Comparing the effectiveness of preparatory activities that help undergraduate students learn from instruction. Learning and Instruction, 82, 101688.
Watson, D., Clark, L. A., & Tellegen, A. (1988). Development and validation of brief measures of positive and negative affect: The PANAS scales. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 54(6), 1063–1070.

Acknowledgments
We greatly appreciate the support of Dr. Ruchi Seth in facilitating access to the classroom. We thank teachers for leading the on-site data collection. Thanks to Leon Calabrese for codifying the data worksheets. The lead author is supported by the National Institute of Education, Singapore under an NIE Start-up Grant (NIE-SUG 5-23 TS).