Supports and Barriers to the Spread of Learning Sciences Innovations: A Comparative Actor Network Analysis
Kay E. Ramey, University of Iowa, kay-ramey@uiowa.edu Jaakko A. Hilppo, University of Helsinki, jaakko.hilppo@helsinki.fi
Reed Stevens, Northwestern University, reed-stevens@northwestern.edu
Abstract: This study compares the adoption and spread of a learning sciences innovation, a project-based, interest-driven STEAM learning program, in two culturally distinct contexts: a large school district in the southeastern United States and the public schools in Helsinki, Finland. Using Actor Network analysis, we show how and what actors needed to be mobilized for the program to get in, get rooted, and spread (or not) in these two contexts. Our findings have implications for understanding both how to spread and sustain learning sciences innovations and similarities and differences between the Finnish and American school systems.
Introduction
In the learning sciences, many of us share the goal of designing innovative learning environments and helping them succeed in the world. However, too many innovations ultimately fail to be sustainable or scalable because of a lack of attention to or understanding of broader organizational capacity (Penuel, et al., 2011) or needed infrastructure (Penuel et al, 2019). To address this problem, we must better understand the supports and barriers to sustainability and scale-up for the types of innovations produced by our community (Penuel, et al., 2011).
This study addresses this gap by comparing the adoption and spread of one educational innovation in two culturally and organizationally distinct contexts: a large, county-level, school district in the southeast United States and the public schools in Helsinki, Finland. This innovation, FUSE Studios (Stevens et al., 2016), is a project-based, interest-driven STEAM (science, technology, engineering, arts, and mathematics) learning environment. We provide a comparative analysis of the adoption and spread of FUSE in these two settings to identify commonalities in the processes involved in scaling the innovation across these two distinct systems.
Outside of the learning sciences, the scaling of educational innovations has long been an important research topic (e.g., Orlich, 1979) and has proliferated in recent years, fueled by globalization. Within scaling discussions, Finland’s education system and its success are highlighted (Hargreaves, Halasz, & Pont, 2008; Hargreaves, et al., 2010; Sahlberg, 2010). Comparative research shows differences between the U.S. and Finnish education systems, along dimensions likely to impact innovation adoption. For example, since the 1980s, as part of the global education reform movement (GERM), the U.S. has focused education policy and reform efforts on:
(1) standardization; (2) core subjects; (3) low-risk routes to learning goals; (4) transferring educational innovations between contexts; and (5) high-stakes accountability (Sahlberg, 2010). However, these elements of GERM have not been adopted as extensively in Finland (Sahlberg, 2010). The differences between these two education systems suggest value in a comparative, cross-national analysis of the adoption and spread of an educational innovation.
We have grounded our investigation in research arguing that adaptability to local contexts influences an innovation’s ability to scale (Coburn, 2003). Fostering scaling by designing for adaptability (Stevens et al., 2018) and focusing on the enactment of core design principles—integrity instead of fidelity—can ensure and even enhance an innovation’s impact (Cobb et al., 2003; LeMahieu, 2011; Stevens et al., 2018) by allowing actors like teachers and administrators to adapt innovations to local needs. Conceiving of scale as adaptation also emphasizes the work of local actors, in contrast to the passive metaphor of diffusion of innovations (Rogers, 2003).
Within the growing body of work on adapting innovations, international comparisons are rare, especially comparisons focusing on the process of adaptation in practice. A notable exception is research on the spread of the 5th Dimension afterschool program to several locations across the U.S. and internationally (Cole & Distributed Literacy Consortium, 2006; Cole, 2016; Lalueza, Sanchez-Busques, & Garcia-Romero, 2019). This work demonstrated how, as the program spread, promising implementations failed, and unlikely ones succeeded, as much through the involvement of unexpected actors as through intentional, coordinated effort. While this work provides insight into the longitudinal processes of scaling, it is largely based on ex post facto designs. What is missing are analyses of the processes of adaptation as they happen (Nespor, 2002; Fenwick, 2011).
Analytic framework
To address this gap, we used Actor Network Theory (ANT) (Callon, 1986; Latour, 1987; Latour, 2005). We chose this approach, because distributed perspectives on thinking and learning, like ANT, are well-suited to analyzing ‘smaller’ processes of implementation (Penuel & Spillane, 2014). This is because ANT treats organizations as dynamic networks of human and non-human actors that come into and out of association with each other, tracing

associations between actors over time, and identifying moments of translation within networks (Latour, 2005). Because such translations are the building blocks of innovation, this approach is well-suited to analyzing change. In our analysis, we drew on ANT’s general analytic approach and specific ANT constructs. For example,
we attended to moments of translation (Callon, 1986)—the processes of change through which networks assembled and extended themselves to adapt to local conditions (Fenwick & Edwards 2010). We explain how our innovation got in and got rooted, in terms of interessement—how allies or actors in the network were recruited and locked into place (Callon, 1986). We discuss how actors established themselves as obligatory passage points (Callon, 1986) in representing an idea, intermediary or problem and related entities in particular ways and invited other entities to detach themselves from their existing networks and connect to this new representation (Fenwick & Edwards, 2010). We discuss enrolment—the process whereby entities to be included in the network became engaged in new identities and behaviors (Fenwick & Edwards 2010)—and the mobilisation of allies (Callon, 1986)—“the moment...when the network becomes sufficiently durable that its translations are extended to other locations and domains” (Fenwick & Edwards 2010, p. 14) by representatives of the network (Callon, 1986). Finally, we distinguish between intermediaries—who move representations or information without transformation—and mediators—who transform the representations and information that move within networks (Latour, 2005). We applied these ANT concepts to answer two research questions: (1) How did FUSE get in, get rooted, and spread in these two contexts?; (2) How did the adoption and spread process differ in these contexts?

Method
Research context
Our focal innovation, FUSE Studios (Stevens et al., 2016), is a project-based STEAM learning environment. It represents a significant departure from the standard package (Becker, 1995) of school in both Finland and the U.S., because it is designed around youth interests and choice. Students choose STEAM challenges from over 30 options on the FUSE website. Each challenge has a trailer video to invite interest, and challenges level up like video games (Stevens, Satwicz, & McCarthy, 2008). Students choose when they are ready to upload evidence of level completion to advance to the next level. Students choose when to start and stop a challenge and whether to work alone or with others. While challenges have specific instructions and parameters, students have leeway in both approach and final product. Students complete challenges with a suite of digital and tangible tools. Finally, students’ primary instructional resources are the FUSE website and other students, rather than the teacher, who plays a ‘facilitator’ role. In 2012, FUSE started as a middle school afterschool program in a large, racially and socioeconomically diverse, suburban school district in the Midwestern U.S. Subsequently, FUSE spread within that district, getting integrated into the school day, first at STEM elementary schools, then at all elementary schools. FUSE has subsequently spread beyond the district, to over 250 sites across the U.S. and seven in Helsinki. Here, we compare two cases of district-level spread: Marvel County Public Schools (a pseudonym) and Helsinki Public Schools. We selected the Helsinki schools as a critical case (Patton, 1990) for comparison to their
U.S. counterparts because of documented differences between the two countries’ education systems. Marvel County represents a typical case (Patton, 1990) of within-district spread relative to other U.S. districts and a comparable case to the Helsinki Public Schools in size and structure. For example, both Marvel County and Helsinki have a population of roughly 600,000 served by one large, centralized school district. There are, however, important differences between the two contexts. Most notably, Marvel County is racially and socioeconomically diverse, while Helsinki is relatively homogeneous. School funding is also structured differently. Marvel County schools depend not only on local tax dollars but also on a mix of Federal Title I funds (available to U.S. schools enrolling at least 40 percent low-income students) and private industry grants, whereas Helsinki Public Schools are reliant solely on government funding. However, because these differences are reflective of broader, country- level differences, we believe they support rather than detract from the argument for comparing these two cases.

Data collection and analysis
In both districts, data were collected by researchers who had engaged previously in a year-long, ethnographic study of classroom culture and student experiences in the original U.S. district implementing FUSE. Research in Marvel County was conducted by the first and third authors, who are American-born researchers, fluent in English, and research in Helsinki was conducted by the second author, who is a native Finn, fluent in Finnish. Data collection began in mid-2017 with observations and video-recording of the professional development (PD) workshops for new FUSE facilitators. During the 2017-18 and 2018-19 school years, we conducted retrospective interviews with new and returning facilitators, school principals, and district-level administrators involved in implementation. We conducted onsite observations of FUSE classrooms at implementing schools (documented using video-recordings and field notes). These data were supplemented with observations and audio-recordings

of administration meetings regarding FUSE (Helsinki) events where FUSE was showcased (Helsinki) and interviews with students about their experiences (Marvel County).
Consistent with our ANT frame, we used our field notes and transcripts from interviews, meetings, and classroom observations to identify relevant actors and their roles in the network at various time points. At each point, we were able to create a representation of the networks in Marvel County and Helsinki, which included relevant humans and nonhumans involved in implementation and how they were brought into association with each another. We then compared across time points to see changes over time. We supplemented this series of comparative snapshots by coding interviews and observation data for explicit mentions or observations of translation in the network (e.g., recruitment or attrition of new actors) and reasons for these changes. The result was a dynamic understanding of the composition of each implementing network and how and why it changed over time. We segmented network activity into three phases defined by their corresponding network goals: getting in, getting rooted, and spread (Stevens et al., 2018). We then compared the two districts.

Results
Getting in
FUSE came to Marvel County through the district’s STEAM Integrator/Magnet Coordinating Teacher, Carol (all names are pseudonyms) and the Project Director of Magnet Schools, Natasha. They encountered the program at the National Art Association Conference in Chicago, in March 2016, where they attended a presentation given by the FUSE Art Director and Program Director. The district, which was otherwise under-resourced, had received a grant to create several STEAM magnet schools. So, Carol and Natasha were seeking STEAM programming (an interessement for FUSE). According to Carol, the primary actors that made FUSE appealing were STEAM and equity. Discussing equity, she said, ‘A lot of people talk about STEM in underrepresented groups, but [FUSE] does it so well and naturally and capitalizes on that human curiosity that we all have.’ The district piloted FUSE at Elementary School A during the 2016-17 school year as the core curriculum for a required, weekly technology class for grades four through six, run by the technology teacher, Jessica. This school was not a STEAM magnet school but one where Carol said, ‘The then principal had a vision. She was going to move ahead as if she was a STEAM magnet.’ This school paid for FUSE using Title I funds.
Getting into Marvel County was supported by the enrolment of a local aerospace and defense technology company, Stark Industries. Stark Industries was enrolled in the network after the principal expressed a need to have someone show her teachers how to do FUSE. Their interessement to join the network was a desire to have spaces for community outreach (mentorship) and to encourage a pipeline into the local STEM workforce for diverse students. Stark engineers volunteered to visit the FUSE studio two Fridays a month as mentors. For FUSE to get into Marvel County, it also had to be adaptable to local needs. For example, for Jessica to run FUSE as the core curriculum in her technology class, the administration required that she align FUSE challenges with ISTE (International Society for Technology in Education) standards. To fit FUSE within the school schedule and accommodate all fourth- through sixth-grade students, Jessica and her administration further translated FUSE by:
(1) making it 40 minutes per week instead of 90 minutes; (2) assigning desktop computers to students, rather than letting students choose different computers each day; (3) adding non-FUSE activities, like building mazes in Minecraft; and (4) adding a ‘Wall of Failure’ displaying failed 3D-prints to destigmatize failure.
FUSE’s entre into Helsinki also began with a conference. At this trans-Nordic conference, in Oslo, Norway, the third author (the principal investigator (PI) of FUSE) presented on FUSE in an invited keynote. This sparked an attending education professor (Liisa) from the University of Helsinki to invite the PI to give a talk on FUSE at the University of Helsinki in Spring 2015. While in Helsinki, the third author was brought by Liisa to School 1, an elementary school widely known as a local leader in testing educational innovations. During this visit, the school principal, Sanna, the FUSE PI, and Liisa discussed bringing FUSE to the school.
At this time, the Finnish schools were adopting a new national core curriculum, which emphasized multidisciplinarity and ‘transversive’ (‘21st century’) skills. Along with the district’s upcoming strategy for “digitalization,” this built interessement for FUSE. District leadership approved the implementation of FUSE in Fall 2016 in negotiations between district leadership, Sanna, and the FUSE PI. These negotiations brought in School 2, a comprehensive school, because district leadership wanted a second context for implementation. The principal of School 2, Jaana, reflected on this, saying, “Well of course the fact that [Liisa] was so impressed by [FUSE], so naturally it kinda increased my trust that this was a worthwhile thing...and then from what I knew about it, it seemed that many of the things in the then-new curriculum were there. And then of course it was especially a good thing for us…as part of our school’s emphasis on design and design learning.”
In Helsinki, as in Marvel County, FUSE had to be adaptable or translatable to the local context. For example, prior to implementation, the FUSE PI, Schools 1 & 2, the Helsinki leadership, and Liisa agreed all the

materials, except for the instructional videos, would be translated to Finnish. However, in Helsinki, FUSE resisted proposed adaptations too divergent from its core design. For example, School 1 suggested running FUSE on available iPads instead of laptops. However, using iPads would have lowered integrity of implementation, as only a few challenges were accessible on iPads. So, the FUSE team pushed back, and School 1 agreed to obtain laptops. In comparing the getting in phase in these two districts, we see similarities in what types of actors were mobilised and how. As actors, both districts displayed interessement for FUSE. In Marvel County, there was the need for equity-oriented STEAM programming for newly-funded STEAM magnet schools, and in Helsinki, there was the push for digitalization in primary education, a new national curriculum that emphasized multidisciplinarity, and a school with a history of being an early adopter of innovations. The path FUSE took to get into each district was also similar. In both cases, it came in through a professional conference and subsequent conversations between FUSE team members and district administrators. In both cases, external actors (Stark Industries and Liisa) were enrolled and served as intermediaries and lent credibility to the evolving actor networks.
Finally, in both cases, FUSE needed to be adaptable to local conditions.
However, there were also important differences in the mobilized actors and their respective functions. In Helsinki, key non-human actors included “digitalization”, the new national curriculum emphasizing ‘transversal competences’ (skills related to well-being, interaction, multidisciplinary, creativity, society, ethics, the environment, global citizenship, and culture), while in Marvel County, non-human actors included equity, STEM/STEAM, the magnet schools grant, ISTE standards, and Title I funds. In Helsinki, the human actors were the FUSE PI, the University of Helsinki professor, and a school principal; only later were district-level administrators involved. In contrast, in Marvel County, the initial human actors were the two district-level administrators and the FUSE art and program directors, who were later joined by a school principal, a technology teacher, and mentors from Stark Industries. These actors also played different roles. For example, while Stark Industries and the University of Helsinki professor both supported implementation, the former contributed mentors, thus serving as a mediator, by altering the students’ and teachers’ experiences of FUSE, while the latter contributed credibility, thus serving as an intermediary but not significantly altering the form of implementation. Finally, while adaptability was important in both cases, specific adaptations to local context differed.
Getting rooted
As implementation progressed, new actors were enrolled or created, and associations between existing actors were strengthened. For example, prior to year two, Carol and Natasha pursued funding for six additional STEAM magnet schools to run FUSE. Three were funded by Stark Industries, and at one, Stark Industries engineers served as mentors. The other three were funded by a new actor, grants offered through FUSE provided by two other STEM industry partners. The second new actor was the two-day professional development (PD) workshop offered to all new and returning FUSE facilitators and administrators. Jessica, Carol, Natasha and several new implementing teachers and building administrators attended this PD in Chicago. When we asked Jessica whether the PD had been helpful, she said, ‘Oh, absolutely. Well, you know you kind of jump into it and you figure things out as you go, but it did really help validate my feelings as to what I was doing, that I was doing it correctly.’ During PD, Jessica, Carol, and Natasha helped new facilitators understand FUSE and lent credibility to the program. However, during the PD, some new facilitators and administrators expressed some ambivalence about their enrolment in the FUSE network. For example, some did not attend the PD, positioning FUSE as less of a priority than other initiatives. Others pushed back on elements of FUSE, like the lack of formal assessment. However, many attendees reflected on the PD’s importance in shaping their understanding of FUSE and implementation. For example, the Middle School A principal said, “I’m so glad I did that [went to the training], because I think as a principal, you’ll never understand FUSE if you don’t do it, and I think that’s why we have a full class of it, instead of just a couple of sections in a couple of days in science, because I felt it, saw it, loved it.” Another set of actors that needed to be recruited to facilitate rooting were physical spaces, materials, and technology. Physical spaces were important, because many of the tools and materials needed to run FUSE were relatively immobile (e.g., 3D printers, vinyl cutters). Several new, year two schools delayed the start of FUSE by several months, because they did not have physical spaces set up for the program. Once the physical spaces were complete, however, they contributed to the rooting of FUSE. These spaces, alternately referred to as ‘FUSE Studios’ or ‘STEAM Labs’ were outfitted not only with computers, flexible seating, and STEAM-themed bulletin boards, but also with FUSE-branded banners, carpets, and bulletin boards. They represented both an additional investment in FUSE and a physical home for it at each school. Consequently, they aided FUSE in establishing itself as something of an obligatory passage point for STEAM learning. The need to install multiple software programs on the computers for FUSE also delayed implementation. However, unlike the physical spaces, which ultimately aided rooting, software problems continued to provide obstacles at many schools. Jessica reflected on software installation, saying that even though her building had a technology person right across the hall, she had

to get ‘put on a list somewhere’ and the technology person ‘gets very, very busy. So it's hard to get her to come in and do 24 computers.’ She and another facilitator in Marvel County never got the software for the popular Game Designer challenge installed correctly. So, students did not have access to that challenge.
Finally, the physical kit materials for FUSE challenges proved important actors in rooting. While initial delivery of kits to Marvel County wasn’t problematic, once the kits were in use, teachers had to manage the materials to prevent loss, damage, or disorganization. Many teachers described this as burdensome. Consequently, some turned materials management over to students, but others denied students access to certain kits.
Despite these setbacks, the network sustained itself, and teachers’ and administrators’ initial impressions of it were positive. In interviews during Fall 2017 and Winter 2018, they mentioned observing emerging student skills like problem solving, persistence, collaboration, and self-directed learning. For example, Jessica said of her students, ‘They're more willing to take on problems. They're more willing to try and figure it out on their own. They're more willing to fail.’ Teachers also said students demonstrated increased confidence, new interests, and engagement in FUSE. For example, Jessica said, ‘I hear so many of them say it's their favorite activity.’ The Middle School B principal echoed these same sentiments and added, ‘I noticed...it was absolutely student led, not teacher led, which is amazing. Kids that I wouldn't normally see work together are working together. They want to help each other, and they congratulate each other.’ These positive impressions played an important role in rooting, as seeing the value in the program seemed to make stakeholders more willing to work to sustain it.
In Helsinki, as implementations progressed, new actors were also enrolled and created. Teacher training brought in teachers, who in turn, brought new spaces and students, as they set up and started their FUSE studios. FUSE also made its way into schedules, and School 2 created a new elective course. To set up the studios, the IT administration, laptops, software, charging stations, kit materials, and 3D printers were enrolled in the network. To facilitate set up, the IT administration also created an installation package of the various FUSE software.
However, not all the requisite actors had been recruited. Although district leadership had agreed on the implementations, they had not provided all necessary materials to schools. School 1 waited three months for their laptops, in part, because of the digitalization program that had helped FUSE get into Helsinki. The program outlined a plan to both upgrade and increase the use of IT in education. The district’s contracted supplier could not keep up with the demand, and when new computers were distributed, non-FUSE schools, with out-of-date devices or a low computer to student ratio, were prioritized. Additionally, the district decided to break down the standard FUSE materials package and purchase some equipment themselves, to cut costs and help with maintenance. This delayed the delivery of 3D printers and vinyl cutters. Local adaptations to the kit materials were also needed. For example, two challenges required electrical plugs and charge converters to work in the Finnish power grid, and pen lasers had to be swapped out to follow Finnish safety regulations. Managing materials, especially replacing broken materials, locally, also proved troublesome for teachers and meant some challenges were not available for considerable time periods. To address this problem, both schools assigned specific teachers to manage materials. Thus, while partly committed, as an assemblage of actors, the district maintained a degree of ambivalence in its connection to FUSE. Despite these setbacks, the network sustained itself. As in Marvel County, early teacher feedback was positive and helped keep the teachers, students and principals engaged with FUSE. For example, one teacher said, ‘The FUSE elective has been very motivating. The students have been enthusiastic about the challenges, have helped each other and learned to problem solve’.
Comparing across the cases, both human and non-human actors played significant roles in rooting. For example, FUSE PD significantly mediated rooting in both cases. New actors were recruited via the PD, however, recruiting these new actors surfaced ambivalence that needed to be managed. In Marvel County, Jessica, Carol, and Natasha played an intermediary role similar to Liisa’s and helped to enroll ambivalent actors by lending credibility to the program. However, Jessica and Carol also served as mediators, shaping implementation. Physical and technological infrastructure also mediated rooting in both cases, especially in establishing FUSE as an obligatory passage point for STEAM learning in Marvel County. However, to mediate rooting, these actors needed to be recruited into the network. Until recruitment occurred, they impeded rooting. In both cases, teachers’ and administrators’ first-hand experiences of FUSE helped stabilize the extending network. Finally, to further stabilize the network, new actors were created: material managers. However, while in Helsinki, these managers were always teachers, in some Marvel County schools, these were students.
One difference between the cases was that grant funding served as an intermediary in Marvel County but not in Helsinki. Stark Industries, in its capacity as a funder (as opposed to a provider of mentors/expertise), functioned as an intermediary, similar to Liisa in Helsinki, providing support for the program without altering it significantly, although the type of support differed. Another difference was in the needs and processes of setting up the physical and technical infrastructure for FUSE. For example, in Marvel County, obtaining computers was not difficult, once funding was in place. However, physical spaces needed to be created, which took time. In contrast, in Helsinki, physical spaces and funding were already in place, but the logistics of centralized distribution

and the priority placed on equitable distribution across the whole Helsinki district led to delays in schools getting technology and highlighted the district’s ambivalence toward FUSE, relative to other priorities. Finally, while digitalization served as an interessement for FUSE in Helsinki as STEAM did in Marvel County, FUSE did not establish itself as an obligatory passage point for digitalization in Helsinki as it did for STEAM in Marvel County.
Spread
In year three, the network of FUSE in Marvel County expanded, adding five non-magnet schools, for a total of 12 elementary, middle, and high schools. One actor that supported this was grant funding. However, funding also placed limitations on FUSE’s ability to spread, because only schools able to procure grants could run it. The physical FUSE studios also played an important role in spread. Once these studios were set up, they were used as showcase spaces for visitors. For example, Wanda, the FUSE facilitator at Elementary School B, described her school showcasing their new FUSE studio, saying, “[W]hen we had our grand opening we invited a lot of district members. We had the chief of police. We had the mayor, the superintendent. [Carol] was here...Oh my gosh, it was amazing. It was, we had about 25-30 people.” These visits and showcases helped increase awareness of and support for FUSE from district officials and local stakeholders, which helped it spread to additional schools. Carol also played a significant role in spreading and sustaining FUSE. She championed the program, applied for grant funding, supported teachers, and created opportunities for teacher collaboration. All teachers reported finding this helpful. Finally, spread was facilitated by the same adaptability that helped FUSE get into Elementary School A. Although FUSE came into the district as a fairly top-down initiative, each school was free to translate it to fit their needs. For example, at High School A, the interessement for FUSE was a need to redesign the ninth-grade career and technology education (CTE) pathways course. FUSE became the core component of that class.
There were also actors that inhibited spread. One, already discussed, was money. Two others were computers and standardized tests. Marvel County had recently switched to computer-based standardized testing. Because the district had limited funds for computers, the computers used for FUSE were also required for testing. Consequently, FUSE was significantly disrupted from March through May each year, while tests were occurring. In Helsinki, in Fall 2016, building and district leaders and researchers from the University of Helsinki, including Liisa, visited the FUSE team at Northwestern University and toured Chicagoland schools implementing FUSE. The visit significantly impacted how FUSE spread in Helsinki. After the visit, the district’s representative called FUSE ‘the missing link’ between the district’s digitalization and STEM goals and the schools’ current practices. He suggested to the district leadership that FUSE should be spread to five other Helsinki schools. The leadership agreed, and in a meeting of the district’s Innovative Schools network, five new elementary schools expressed interest in implementing FUSE. However, word of FUSE had already found its way to some of the schools before this. In Fall 2016, School 1 showcased FUSE to other teachers in their local area as part of a professional development workshop. The principal of School 3, Eeva, recalled this, saying, ‘But way before that [the network meeting], when I had been to [School1] and seen [FUSE] for the first time, I had then thought that
how could we get this, like what would be my channels that I could pull so that we could get our own FUSE.’
As enrolment of new actors continued, complexity increased. New teachers, rooms, students, and equipment became part of the network, and the district showcased FUSE as a frontier innovation in educational events in Helsinki. However, again, there were significant delays in mobilizing infrastructure. New, FUSE- dedicated laptops and charging stations arrived three months late. This was due to both the digitalization program and centralization in the district’s IT support, spurred by the discovery of embezzlement. This centralization meant that IT support was slow in responding to equipment orders. Furthermore, the FUSE software package created previously by IT support could not be used, because the new system required a different installation method.
This complexity eventually impacted the network’s size and composition. Because of the delays, School 5 never started FUSE and School 4 implemented FUSE only as one part of its IT elective. Teachers, who were initially enticed by FUSE, told us, by the time the laptops had arrived, they had needed to plan their year without FUSE, and they had largely forgotten the PD. This ambivalence drove remaining teachers to organize themselves in a new way. To share FUSE experiences and information, they began regular meetings organized by a teacher from School 2, who had been appointed to the district’s STEAM coordination team as a FUSE expert teacher.
We see similarities in the actors responsible for spreading FUSE in both cases. For example, technological infrastructure was key mediator that both supported and impeded spread. However, how technology mediated spread and the new actors it enrolled were different. Showcase spaces or events were important actors in both Marvel County and Helsinki, recruiting additional human actors. Specific humans also played important roles in both cases in advocating for the program or connecting other actors. However, these humans occupied different institutionalized roles and supported the network differently. Finally, the adaptability of FUSE to new contexts with particular interessements supported both within and between school spread in both cases.

Discussion
In answer to our question, ‘How did FUSE get in, get rooted, and spread in these two contexts?’, we found that in both cases, getting in was determined by how well FUSE aligned with local ideas and initiatives. It was also aided by the individual advocacy and support of actors like Liisa and Sanna (in Helsinki) and Carol and Stark Industries mentors (in Marvel County). Getting rooted was facilitated by the recruitment of additional teachers and administrators, through PD and these actors’ positive firsthand experiences of FUSE. It was also impacted by the recruitment (or lack thereof) of non-human actors, including physical spaces, computers, challenge materials, and funding. Rooting was also aided by the program’s ability to be translated to local needs and constraints. Finally, spread was facilitated by adaptability; non-human actors like physical showcase spaces, money, and technological infrastructure; and human actors serving as advocates, recruiting external actors to the network.
In answer to our second research question, there were important differences between the actors and processes of translation in the two cases. First, the interessement for FUSE was different. In Marvel County, it was a need for equity-oriented STEAM programming aligned with technology standards and the goals of the CTE pathways course. In Helsinki, it was the digitalization initiative and the new national curriculum. Second, in Marvel County, Stark Industries served as both a mediator (providing mentors) and intermediary (providing funding). In Helsinki, Liisa provided external support for implementation but only as an intermediary (advocate for the program). Third, while physical and technological infrastructure played an important role in both cases, they mediated implementation differently. Physical spaces played a more significant role in initially impeding and ultimately supporting implementation in Marvel County than in Helsinki. Conversely, computers and kit materials provided a more significant impediment to implementation in Helsinki. In Helsinki, technology problems were mostly with obtaining the computers and materials, while in Marvel County the problems were with their use and functionality. Finally, while adaptability was important in both contexts, in Marvel County, FUSE was adapted for use across multiple grade levels, and implementations varied widely based on specific local interessements. The Helsinki adaptations were more homogeneous; four of the five schools implemented FUSE as a grade 5-6 elective class, and only one incorporated FUSE into grade 5-6 science.
These differences in the processes and outcomes of translation reflect larger economic and cultural- historical differences between the two contexts. For example, Marvel County schools were reliant on external grant funding, reflective of the capitalist economic system in the U.S. and the inequitable way in which public educational resources are distributed. In contrast, in Helsinki, public funding for programming and materials was assured, but it depended on centralized distribution systems that moved slowly and had to balance multiple demands. The way in which equity was conceptualized and mobilized differently in the two countries was also reflective of cultural differences. In Marvel County, a diverse and majority low-income student population spurred an interest in programming that equitably engaged diverse students. In Helsinki, equity focused more on ensuring equitable distribution of technology across schools. Finally, in Finland, a country with a long and rich tradition of craft education, the interessement for FUSE was integrating digitalization into this craft tradition, whereas, in the U.S., where there has long been a push for technology in schools, the interessement was hands-on STEAM.
Our analysis has implications for understanding the spread of educational innovations broadly and specifically for innovations like FUSE. For example, as a STEAM program, FUSE is heavily dependent on technology, physical materials, and dedicated physical spaces. Therefore, the actors needed to implement it successfully were different from those for a traditional text-based curriculum (and may better reflect the future of educational innovations). FUSE activities also make connections to the work of industry professionals. This bent invited in Stark Industries, and it poses the question of the comparative advantages and disadvantages of external industry partners becoming more prominent actors in the spread of future educational innovations.
Altogether, our results underscore the importance of conceptualizing spread as an active, in vivo process in which enrolled actors—including the innovation itself and the adopting educational system—need to be seen as complex entities nested in and constituted by already existing and changing networks. In line with work on the spread of the Fifth Dimension (Cole et al., 2016), our analysis indicates that the spread of FUSE resulted from active efforts by various actors, both expected and unexpected. However, by following implementation processes as they happened, we demonstrated that some actors’ roles changed over time, and some actors worked for and against the spread of FUSE. Ambivalence was created by the spread process and needed to be managed as part of it (cf. Fenwick, 2011). What this highlights for future spread studies is the need to remain open and responsive to changing circumstances. While the specifics of every future spread process will be endemic to and emblematic of the innovation and the adopting system(s) in question, what can be learned from our study is that existing network ties will need attention and maintenance while the innovation spreads. In this sense, our comparative case study offers a prototypical narrative (Nissen, 2015) that embodies the concreteness of lived practices and espoused theoretical perspectives in ways that can help researchers and designers see innovations in a new light.

References
Becker, H. S. (1995). The power of inertia. Qualitative Sociology, 18(3), 301-309.
Callon, M. (1986). Some elements of a sociology of translation: domestication of the scallops and the fishermenof Saint Brieuc Bay, in J. Law (Ed.) Power, Action and Belief: A New Sociology of Knowledge? London:Routledge & Kegan Paul, pp. 196–233.
Cobb, P., Confrey, J., diSessa, A., Lehrer, R., & Schauble, L. (2003). Design experiments in educational research.Educational Researcher, 32(1), 9–13.
Coburn, C. E. (2003). Rethinking scale: Moving beyond numbers to deep and lasting change.
EducationalResearcher, 32(6), 3-12.
Cole, M. (2016). Designing for development: Across the scales of time. Developmental Psychology, 52(11),1679–
1689.
Cole, M. & The Distributed Literacy Consortium (2006). The Fifth Dimension: An afterschool program built ondiversity. Russell Sage Foundation: New York, NY.
Fenwick, T. & Edwards, R. (2010). Actor-network theory in education. Routledge: New York, NY.
Fenwick, T. (2011). Reading Educational Reform with Actor Network Theory: Fluid spaces, otherings, andambivalences. Educational Philosophy and Theory, 43(S1).
Hargreaves, A., Halasz, G., & Pont, B. (2008). The Finnish approach to system leadership. In Pont, B., Nusche,D., & Hopkins, D. (Eds.) Improving school leadership (Vol. 2, pp. 69-109). Case studies on system leadership. OECD: Paris.
Hargreaves, A., Lieberman, A., Fullan, M., & Hopkins, D. (Eds.) (2010). Second international handbook ofeducational change (pp. 105-117). Springer. doi: 10.1007/978-90-481-2660-6_6
Lalueza, J. L., Sanchez-Busques, S., & Garcia-Romero, D. (2019): Following the trail of the 5th dimension:learning from contradictions in a university-community partnership. Mind, Culture, and Activity, 27(2), 132-139.
Latour, B. (1987). Science in action: How to follow scientists and engineers through society. Cambridge, Mass.:Harvard University Press.
Latour, B. (2005). Reassembling the social: An introduction to Actor-Network-Theory. London: OxfordUniversity Press.
LeMahieu, P. (2011). What We Need in Education is More Integrity (and Less Fidelity) of Implementation.[Web log comment]. Available at: http://www.carnegiefoundation.org/blog/what- we-need-in-education-is-more-integrity-and-less-fidelity-of-implementation/
Nespor, J. (2002). Networks and contexts of reform. Journal of Educational Change, 3, 365-382.
Nissen, M. (2015). Meeting youth in movement and on neutral ground. Dialogic Pedagogy: An InternationalOnline Journal, 3.
Orlich, D. C. (1979). Federal Educational Policy: The Paradox of Innovation and Centralization.
EducationalResearcher, 8(7), 4–9.
Patton, M.Q. (1990). Qualitative evaluation and research methods (2nd ed.). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Penuel, W. R. & Spillane, J. P. (2014). Learning sciences and policy design and implementation: Key conceptsand tools for collaborative engagement. In R. K. Sawyer (Ed.) The Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences, 2nd edition (pp. 649-667). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Penuel, W. R., Fishman, B. J., Cheng, B. H., & Sabelli, N. (2011). Organizing research and development at theintersection of learning, implementation, and design. Educational Researcher, 40(7), 331-337.
Penuel, W. P. (2019). Infrastructuring as a practice of design-based research for supporting and studyingequitable implementation and sustainability of innovations. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 00, 1-19.
Rogers, E. M. (2003). Diffusion of innovations. (5th ed.). New York: Simon and Schuster.
Sahlberg, P. (2010). Educational Change in Finland. In A. Hargreaves et al. (Eds.), Second international handbookof educational change (pp. 323-348). Springer. doi: 10.1007/978-90-481-2660-6_6
Stevens, R., Ramey, K., Hilppo, J., Kumpulainen, K., Kajamaa, A., Rajala, A., Meyerhoff, P., & Halverson, R. (2018). Exploring the adoption, spread, and sustainability of an informal STEAM learning innovation in schools. Proceedings of the 13th International Conference of the Learning Sciences, London, UK, Volume 2, 1203-1210.
Stevens, R., Jona, K., Penney, L., Champion, D., Ramey, K. E., Hilppo, J., Echevarria, R., & Penuel, W. (2016).FUSE: An alternative infrastructure for empowering learners in schools. Proceedings of the 12thInternational Conference of the Learning Sciences, Singapore, SG, Volume 2, 1025-1032.
Stevens, R., Satwicz, T., & McCarthy, L. (2008). In game, In room, In world: Reconnecting video game play to
the rest of kids’ lives. In K. Salen (Ed.), The ecology of games. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.