Critical Awareness as a Resource for Climate Change Connective and Productive Disciplinary Engagement

Heather F. Clark, California State University Dominguez Hills, hclark@csudh.edu

Abstract: The Connective and Productive Disciplinary Engagement framework provides design and analysis tools to explore the affordances of foregrounding power dynamics as students learn about climate change. In this study of Black and Latinx high school chemistry students, I focus on the principle of resources to show how youths’ critical awareness of social issues is a sensemaking resource for learning about climate change in their community. Through analysis of interactions, I show how the teacher routinely invited students to use their personal, out-of-school experiences in classroom activities and how students responded by drawing on their critical awareness of racial, socioeconomic, and local inequities to explain and model climate change’s causes and solutions. These data contribute to uplifting the generative sensemaking resources and practices of marginalized youth. I suggest these youths’ critical awareness be foregrounded in science education to support critical and equitable learning opportunities.

Introduction
Climate change is a wicked problem affecting every aspect of Earth’s systems and mixed up with other problems that cannot be solved in isolation (Lehtonen et al., 2018). Climate change education is also a wicked problem with distributive injustices mixed up in educational opportunities and climate disruptions; the most marginalized learners too often live in communities that are hardest hit by the climate crisis and attend schools with the fewest opportunities to learn how to act on this crisis. To address the educational inequities related to teaching and learning climate change, transformative practices are needed to support marginalized youth and their teachers to grapple with this complicated problem and its potential solutions. The frameworks of Productive Disciplinary Engagement (PDE) (Engle & Conant, 2002) and Connective and Productive Disciplinary Engagement (CPDE) (Agarwal & Sengupta-Irving, 2019) are powerful tools to address these challenges. As a phenomenon observable in classrooms and a high-level set of design principles, PDE has been widely adopted in science and math teaching to support authentic engagement with questions meaningful to a discipline (Engle, 2012). Agarwal and Sengupta- Irving (2019) expanded PDE to be connective by arguing that disciplinary engagement rests upon social relations and dynamics of power.
In this study I examine student engagement in a chemistry class designed and analyzed with the CPDE framework to understand how a group of Black and Latinx students made sense of climate change in their community. I focus here on the CPDE principle of resources to understand what resources supported students’ connective-disciplinary engagement with climate change. The affordances of resources are important to investigate because of gaps in theoretical and empirical knowledge, which Agarwal and Sengupta-Irving (2019) acknowledged when they identified resources as the least articulated principle in the framework. This gap is also identified in socioscientific issue (SSI) based approaches to science education; while we know students bring rich resources to their learning and attention to those resources is part of effective instruction (NRC, 2000), the roles of those resources in learning and later decision making remains unclear (Klaver et al., 2023). I focus here on students’ personal, out-of-school experiences as important resources in learning about science issues with social dimensions (Warren et al., 2001). With a focus on re-mediating educational inequities, I contribute evidence on the knowledge and experiences marginalized students of color use as sensemaking resources when learning about climate change, and the role of their teacher in supporting the use of those resources. I organize this paper around answering two exploratory research questions: 1. How does the teacher invite everyday experiences into the classroom as resources for CPDE with climate change? And 2. How do students respond to these invitations and what experiences and knowledge do they bring to classroom work as resources to support their CPDE with climate change?
Theoretical framework
This study is rooted in CPDE and critical approaches to SSI based education. PDE, as the foundation of CPDE, is organized by four principles that support students in productively engaging with authentic questions of disciplines. First, problematizing is the process of grappling with an intellectual problem or uncertainty that is an open question from students’ perspective and within their reach to answer. Second, authority describes students having

agency to play an active role in defining and addressing problems. Third, accountability describes students’ intellectual work being responsive to the concepts, practices, and norms established by stakeholders inside and outside of the classroom. Last, resources function at a different level than the other three principles as they support those principles and include anything that students need to accomplish their work. Engle and Conant (2002) described resources as including sufficient time to work as well as technological tools, artifacts, practices, and other materials.
Moving from PDE to CPDE is important for climate change education because connective learning requires centering power dynamics. While climate change is most often taught in science classrooms, the climate crisis is not solely a scientific problem but rather is a sociopolitical crisis; teaching for CPDE can empower educators to engage students authentically with climate change’s sociopolitical dimensions alongside scientific dimensions. Power dynamics and inequalities are essential to confront in understanding the climate crisis as a product of colonialism and carbon extractive development (Ghosh, 2021; Henderson, 2019).
CPDE does not add a principle to the framework, but rather expands each principle with two themes of power: epistemic diversity, and historicity and identity. First, epistemic diversity redresses epistemic injustices that systematically discredit the sensemaking practices of minoritized learners that fall outside canonical Western knowledge. Each principle of PDE is expanded to privilege heterogeneity in perspectives, meanings, practices, and values of knowing and doing science that are historically and culturally constituted. Second, historicity and identity relates to being and becoming and elevates relationality and temporality in the principles of PDE. This theme ensures the recognition of learners as individuals who are shaped by social, cultural, and political history over time. For the principle of resources, these themes foreground knowledge of sociopolitical dimensions of disciplines as needed by students to support their classroom work. These sociopolitically oriented conceptual resources can include racial (counter)narratives, cultural or community-based knowledge, and relationships.
In addition to designing for CPDE, this study is situated at the intersection of SSI (Sadler, 2004) and critical approaches to education (Freire, 1970). Climate change is arguably the quintessential SSI, a complex, open-ended, ill-structured problem with no definitive answer that is informed by economic, social, political, and ethical considerations (Zangori et al., 2017). Most climate change education is best described as the banking model, depoliticized instruction that socializes students into the world as it is. Instruction from an SSI perspective moves towards a problem-posing approach and has been shown to legitimize students’ diverse experiences as having a place in science classrooms.
Methods
Context and researcher positionality
This research was conducted during the academic year of 2020-2021 while all instruction was remote due to the COVID-19 pandemic (see Clark, 2024 for additional details on the design on the broader study). I worked at a grades 7-12 Title 1 public school located in a low-income neighborhood of Los Angeles, California in the United States. Demographically, the students were 52% Black and 48% Latinx with 22% designated as English Language Learners. Data are drawn from one section of chemistry with 18 students that regularly attended class. In the distance learning context, students preferred to participate via the Zoom chat than speak and there were generally lower rates of attendance and assignment completion that we attribute to the myriad hardships of the pandemic.
My methodological approaches are design-based research (DBR) (Sandoval & Bell, 2004) and participatory design research (PDR) (Bang & Vossoughi, 2016). I co-designed the chemistry course with my teacher-partner, Ms. T, a young Vietnamese American woman in her third year of teaching during this study (when I use “we” throughout this study, I am referring to myself and Ms. T). From the PDR commitments, I attended to how “critical historicity, power, and relational dynamics shape processes of partnering and the possible forms of learning that emerge in and through them” (Bang & Vossoughi, 2016, p. 174). As a White woman from communities not experiencing environmental injustices, I come to this work as a visitor and ally to the community where students live and Ms. T works. I understand teaching and learning as inseparable from social life and geopolitical projects, and education research as inseparable from the historical and sociopolitical dimensions of schools, communities, and disciplines.

Design overview
This research is based on a co-designed chemistry course with five units in the year, with the first unit (unit zero) representing a two-week period of community building and the next four units being localized versions of the California Next Generation Science Standards Framework’s suggested instructional segements (Science Framework for California Public Schools, 2016) (summarized in Table 1). Data are drawn from units 2 and 4 as

the focal units that addressed climate change-specific phenomena. The guiding question of unit 2 was, “How does land use in our city impact the carbon cycle?” in which students created models that layered land use changes, issues of equitable access to greenspace, and the mechanisms of the carbon cycle. The guiding question of unit 4 was, “What are the impacts of our city getting hotter?” in which students modeled emission-reduction actions in their neighborhood, experiences with extreme heat, and the mechanisms of the greenhouse effect.
In designing the curriculum, Ms. T and I used CPDE to develop conceptual resources, including ways to invite students to bring epistemically diverse resources to activities and ways to position those resources as welcome and legitimate. Table 2 summarizes four categories of designed and invited resources. Ms. T invited students to bring out-of-school knowledge and everyday experiences to their disciplinary work as sensemaking resources, such narratives rooted in culture, community, or families. The activities and tasks that invited and positioned out-of-school knowledge and experiences included: warm-ups that explored race and class-based differences that relate to phenomena, discussions and written reflections that explicitly required first-hand experiences as data, modeling and explanations that layered place-based knowledge with more abstract concepts, and thought-experiments to imagine different possible futures based on actions or inactions in the present day.
Data sources and analysis
Due to the unique forms of participation in the remote learning environment, particularly when this modality was largely improvised, unfamiliar, and unsupported in 2020-2021, my analytical approach has important deviations from other PDE and CPDE analysis of face-to-face interactions. Rather than analyze traditional discourse, I examine student engagement by drawing on the infrequent verbal participation, public Zoom chat contributions, and Ms. T’s revoicing of contributions students sent to her in the private Zoom chat. I combined these observations with two proxies of engagement: written classroom work and interviews. These proxies are temporally distal but represent students’ thoughts about and reflections on interactions; written artifacts embody how students interacted during activities, and interviews are students’ retrospective reflection on interactions. Below I elaborate on each of these data sources.
First, I collected observational field notes and associated analytical memos for every class taught in units 2 and 4, representing 36 lessons (~40 hours). Field notes included descriptions of interactions and participants’ verbatim speech or paraphrases of utterances (Erickson, 1986) as well as copies of the Zoom chat. Second, I collected students’ digital science notebooks and analyzed 20 activities that included diagrammatic models, warm- ups, exit tickets, post-discussion reflections, and worksheets, all of which surfaced student thinking and engagement during activities. Due to the challenge of remote learning, overall completion of assignments was low; for the 18 students in this study, the average number of assignments completed was nine. Third, I conducted a series of three interviews with 8 students with the objective of eliciting students’ thinking about climate change and perceptions of their engagement. Here I focus on data from the third interview that asked semi-structured questions exploring how engagement with sociopolitical and scientific dimensions of climate change influenced how students understand climate change, and how students see chemistry as a tool for understanding climate change inequities.
My analytical approach was based on the suggestions by Engle and Conant (2002) and Agarwal and Sengupta-Irving (2019) for analyzing PDE/CPDE. I began with organizing the three data sources into a detailed content log of engagement. First, I input the observation field notes to have a chronological record of the activities and participation, then I matched the student artifacts from the digital notebooks with activities. To complete the content logs, I input the interview excerpts to match the activity that the students were reflecting on. To analyze the logs, I looked for the principles of CPDE in Ms. T’s actions and students’ actions. I used structural coding (Saldaña, 2014) to deductively segment the content log based on the extent they embodied each principle. For resources, for each episode I asked, “Does this involve a resource?” and when I identified an interaction that I associated with the CPDE principle of resources I asked a series of questions drawn from Engle’s (2012) and Agarwal and Sengupta-Irving’s suggestions. For example, I asked “what sensemaking resources do students request or offer, and what were the affordances of those resources?” and “how is a resource legitimized or delegitimized as valuable for scientific sensemaking?” I wrote out my answers to these questions in a column of the content log and I repeated this process for each principle. In one joint-analysis session with Ms. T, we engaged in this process of asking structured questions about a segment of the data together to member check and calibrate analysis. Once I had identified and analyzed the range of resources, I completed my analysis by grouping the resources based on the categories in Table 2.

Table 1
Sequence of Storylines
Segment big idea
Anchoring phenomenon
Overarching question
Framing to sociopolitical levers of change in natural phenomenon
The flow of energy released from fuels in combustion reactions powers our world
Carbon is transformed and transferred and is always conserved
Energy change in chemical reactions shows the change in chemical bonds
Human activity has altered the climate system




Used vegetable oil can replace diesel fuel, but we keep drilling diesel in our neighborhood
Land use in L.A., including the lack of parks, decreases the carbon reservoirs
Different chemical reactions produce different temperature changes
Carbon-dependent infrastructure has unbalanced the greenhouse effect
Elicitation of students’ wonderings and observations about their community
Why aren’t we using vegetable oil to fuel our cars?

How does land use in our city impact the carbon cycle?
What chemical reactions are happening all around me?
What are the impacts of our city getting hotter?


Table 2
Example
Category
Designed and Invited Resources


Scaffolded opportunities to engage with the problem
Multiple relevant sources of information
Cohesive storyline
Intersections of science and sociopolitical dimensions
Geophysical data and micro-climate models Community voices and stories
Traditional and social media Concepts from other subject matters

Relationships Students’ participation in climate systems Students’ position within and to systems of power

Out-of-school knowledge and experiences
Cultural and ethnic/racial knowledge and narratives
Community and place-based everyday knowledge and experiences Students’ histories, identities, and imagined futures


Findings
To understand how everyday experiences served as resources for engagement, here I analyze two episodes to illustrate Ms. T’s invitations and students’ responses. These episodes were selected because they are typical of Ms. T’s practice but are the richest, exemplary examples of student responses that demonstrate the potential of the CPDE framework. These episodes include synchronous interactions plus student writing and interview responses. Each episode highlights critical awareness of a social issue – racial, socioeconomic, and community inequities – as a resource students used to make sense of climate change. To supplement the episodes and illustrate how Ms. T’s actions were routine discourse patterns that facilitated student engagement, I also provide additional excerpts of her talk.

Episode 1: Critical awareness of racial and socioeconomic inequities
During unit 2, students explored local land use and the distribution of urban green space in their neighborhood compared to the city. Ms. T was experienced in place-based instruction and confident teaching the chemistry of the carbon cycle through the local phenomenon of a lack of parks around the school. We designed problematizing opportunities to layer scientific and sociopolitical dimensions of climate change for students to grapple with the chemical transformations of carbon that explain the socioecological impacts of green space inequities.
Below I first share how Ms. T invited students to bring their experiences with urban greenspace into class as sensemaking resources (addressing research question 1) and then show exemplary examples of student responses (addressing research question 2). To launch an activity analyzing local maps, Ms. T said,
Land use is not equal across Los Angeles and racism plays a big role in how land is used across Los Angeles. I want you to use what you learned about redlining in history class in this unit.

Think about the places you’ve been here in South L.A. and around the city, or the stories your friends and family have told you about places they’ve been.
Ms. T displayed two maps, one of the students’ neighborhood and one of an infamously wealthy, White neighborhood across town and asked students to share their observations. One student, Santi (all student names are pseudonyms) wrote in the chat, “Damn Beverley Hills looks way better. It’s just a white neighborhood,” and later added, “F*** racism we breathing the same air we are all the same with different color of skin.” Carolina wrote in chat that, “the people living there are famous and rich, even I think there is no drilling oil areas there.” Vicki wrote a list of differences, including, “More parks; white neighborhood; rich and famous people.” Ms. T ended the activity by celebrating students’ contributions and encouraging them to keep bringing in ideas about “race, politics, money, and science all at the same time.”
Students drew on this activity later in their models of the carbon cycle and reflected on this discussion in their interviews. For example, Zuri, JJ, and Vicki said,
My model shows the fact that people with low-income most likely don’t have a car to travel to school, work, etc. Low-income individuals are proven to suffer the worst when it comes to climate change and they are barely given any resources to recover from natural disasters or climate change. (JJ, unit 2 model)

There are a lot of CO2 in the atmosphere in Los Angeles because of humans impact on the land. Inequality impacts how we use lands because white neighborhoods usually has more nicer buildings, recreational buildings, and more parks. Humans drill crude oil from fossil fuels in mostly communities of color. (Zuri, unit 2 model)

Chemistry helps me to understand why different people that live in different neighborhoods are affected more by climate change, and why people that live in the richer neighborhoods have— aren't extremely affected by climate change as much. Knowing science helps me understand social [aspects] because I would say that all people in lower income neighborhoods are more affected by climate change because they have less resources to help them deal with it and they also have less parks and trees because of they’re in low-income neighborhoods. Well yeah, and people in rich neighborhoods, or the suburbs have more parks, and like, more resources and stuff to take care of it so they aren’t affected as much as people that live in those neighborhoods. (Zuri, interview 3)

More African American and Latinos, Latinx people how they’re more affected because of how the inequality, with payments and everything and how Caucasian people have more money easily in their areas it’s less polluted than where we are because of how our areas are like redlined and everything. How all the factories are based towards like where we live and stuff, and how they just have a lot of things going on that is polluting the area. (Vicki, interview 3)

In this episode, we see Ms. T’s invitations and actions legitimizing data and stories of Black and Latinx low- income communities as a sensemaking resources when she explicitly invited first-hand observations and knowledge of racist land use and housing practices. Students responded by using their critical awareness of racial and socioeconomic inequities to make sense of the causes of climate change and climate injustice. Specifically, Santi, Zuri, and Vicki named White communities as spared from climate disruption and Black and Latinx communities as burdened because of racism entrenched in land use decisions. Carolina, JJ, and Zuri identified the power of wealth in mitigating climate disruptions and low socioeconomic status creating vulnerability.
It was routine for Ms. T to integrate data organized by race/ethnicity or socioeconomic status, and to invite thinking related to racial or class injustices. Here I share additional examples of her talk patterns to illustrate that episode 1 represents Ms. T’s routines and to illustrate additional ways to invite everyday experiences as resources for CPDE. First, Ms. T routinely and explicitly invited racial narratives as explanatory mechanisms and positively evaluated students’ comments that referenced race. For example, she showed data on racial disparities in hospitalizations due to heat stroke during a recent heatwave. In another example, while explaining the work of a local nonprofit, she said “communities of color are neglected by government investments so local groups have to help with getting solar panels to the neighborhood.” In another class, she shared passages from Braiding Sweetgrass to elevate Indigenous perspectives on land use. Second, Ms. T unambiguously invited narratives of class, data on wealth inequity, and experiences of poverty into class. For example, in one discussion Ms. T

described her use of a gas-powered car positioning her as “participating in this industrial age” and contributing to global warming. But in reflecting on her role in the climate system, she said “we’re not saying ‘Oh Ms. T is evil with her gas car.’ No, this is what I can afford and at the end of the day my emissions are nothing compared to huge companies like McDonalds.” This action worked to position her emissions within a broader economic system and invited students to consider their own actions as constrained by poverty and economic injustices. These routine invitations created the space for students to draw on their critical awareness of social issues in making sense of climate change.

Episode 2: Critical awareness of community inequities
During unit 4, students explored extreme heat events and mitigating technology in their community. While focusing on the local implications of a global phenomenon like the greenhouse effect was challenging for Ms. T, by this point in the year she was adept at holding herself and students accountable to local and global scale explanations. The design of unit 4 included activity structures where students roleplayed various emitters of greenhouse gases to explore motivations and impacts for emissions, as well as the benefits and challenges of emissions reduction.
For episode 2, again I start by showing how Ms. T invited students to use their experiences with extreme heat as a sensemaking resource and then show exemplary examples of student responses. To launch an activity exploring sources of greenhouse gas emissions and various stakeholders in the community, Ms. T said,
Does everyone you know in South L.A. have air conditioning on hot a day? Let’s think about where those emissions come from and all the groups we’ve mentioned. Homeless people, farmers, low-income people. Are the people getting flooded in hurricanes or suffering in the heat waves the same people emitting the most carbon?

In the written reflections that accompanied this data exploration, students took up this question of distributive justice focused on who is emitting the most and least greenhouse gases relative to who is feeling the most and least impacts. In her written response in her unit 4 notebook, Zuri said, “The people most impacted by heat are not responsible for releasing the most greenhouse gases since they don’t even use air conditioning which costs electricity and homeless people probably don’t have cars to drive which is one of the biggest factors of climate change.”
In the activities that followed this discussion on the causes of climate change, Ms. T shifted the focus of attention to climate change solutions. Ms. T launched a discussion on residential solar panels as a mitigation technology by asking “who has seen solar panels on roofs? Who benefits from solar panels?” which led to multiple students writing in the chat the homeowners benefited when their electricity bills are reduced by producing their own electricity from their solar panels. Following this Ms. T also asked, “So does everyone have equal access to solar panels to make their electricity?” In response, Juan Carlos wrote in the chat a simple “no” and when Ms. T asked him to explain why not, he unmuted and said, “It’s more difficult to put solar panels on apartment buildings. Where we live solar panels aren’t so simple.” Ms. T asked why it is not so simple for renters in apartment buildings and a chorus of students wrote in the chat variations on statements that renters do not have power to make decisions about their buildings and that landlords are greedy or negligent.
In this episode, Juan Carlos’ comment and the reactions from his classmates embodied the CPDE principle of resources. They drew on their critical awareness of social issues facing their local community as a resource to make sense of climate mitigation, specifically renters experiencing powerless in decision making limiting their access to the mitigation technology of solar panels. Juan Carlos and his classmates used their everyday experiences as renter in their community and their critical awareness of the sociopolitical challenges faced by renters to grapple with climate solutions. In these interactions, students argued for considering the prevalence of low-income renters and the typical behavior of landlords in the area when evaluating the potential value of solar panels. This critical awareness shaped their assessment of the limited impact solar panels might have in their community and as such shaped their sensemaking about climate change’s solution in meaningful and critical ways.
Ms. T routinely invited students to consider their everyday observations in the local community as data or evidence in activities. Here I share additional examples of her discourse patterns to answer research question
1. Her talk routines included simple and direct invitations to look around as they made sense of climate change or worked on class activities. For example, while launching an activity on the carbon cycle, Ms. T said, “We see carbon in everything, but the amount of carbon in different places and things is different. What do you see out your window right now? Does it store a lot or a little?” Expanding beyond the present moment and current setting, Ms. T regularly invited students to recall everyday experiences. For example, when launching an activity

examining data on heat waves, she said “What are specific ways you may experience these impacts of a heat wave in your everyday life?” Ms. T’s invitations situated students’ everyday observations as valuable sensemaking resources and these routines invited students to bring their critical awareness of that community-based knowledge to their disciplinary work.

Implications
Attention to students’ personal experiences as resources is an important aspect of good teaching for all students (NRC, 2000). But for students whose resources have not been recognized as valuable in educational contexts or have been systematically delegitimized and excluded to perpetuate inequities, transformative practices are needed to remediate these harms and support epistemic justice. The examples of interactions I present in this study show how Ms. T, with practices anchored in CPDE, created a classroom community with epistemic justice that honored her Black and Latinx students’ diverse ways of knowing and being. Ms. T welcomed out-of-school experiences into the classroom as sensemaking resources with a range of discourse routines that established a norm and culture that dignified these experiences and legitimized them as part of scientific thinking. Through a combination of direct, explicit invitations to consider issues of race, class, and place along with modeling what it sounds like to use these experiences as resources in sensemaking, Ms. T positioned students’ diverse experiences as legitimate resources for making sense of climate change. More than just belonging in the classroom, Ms. T established these resources as necessary, even essential, in fully understanding the disciplinary problem; an explanation of climate change was only complete if it addressed power dynamics.
In response to Ms. T’s actions legitimizing everyday experiences as valuable resources in the science classroom, students brought their experiences related to inequities to their scientific work. These youths’ critical awareness, that they developed through everyday experiences in marginalized communities, became an educational asset in this context. Critical awareness of social issues related to racial, economic, and place-based climate inequities were used as conceptual resources to explain climate change observations.
The generative power of resources within the CPDE framework is that appropriate resources support the other principles, specifically acting to balance the work of problematizing (Engle, 2012). In this study, Ms. T and her students problematized apolitical explanations of climate change in a range of way. First, they rejected the educational norm of focusing on mastery of canonical science concepts to explain climate change as a scientific problem and instead centered sociopolitical dimensions. Second, they politicized the human-nature divide to situate themselves as part of natural systems and participants in climate systems. Third, students problematized the power dynamics underlying the causes and solutions to climate change. Students’ critical awareness of race, class, and place-based issues made this problematizing possible. Looking at the interactions in episode 1, students modeled the carbon cycle as linked to structural racism in land use which deprived their community of the socioecological benefits of parks. From episode 2, students rejected solar panels as a mitigation strategy because of structural inequities experienced by low-income renters. In this interaction, students identified a sort of floor for how much they could reduce their carbon emissions; they wanted solar panels to reduce their residential emissions but could not access them and therefore were limited to the fossil-fuel reliant technologies in their homes. This analysis suggests that critical awareness is a generative educational asset that marginalized youth from nondominant communities can use in science learning. This critical awareness is a valuable resource to support problematizing from a connective, critical perspective.
Ultimately, the value of supporting the enactment and balance of the four principles of CPDE is that productive engagement becomes more likely. Showing the degree to which engagement was productive for these students requires analysis of all four principles and therefore is outside the scope of this study. I conjecture that connecting instruction to students’ everyday experiences and supporting their critical awareness of those experiences as a sensemaking resource is a foundational aspect of productivity. In CPDE, learning about a discipline is connected to students’ lives and to the issues of power in the discipline; students’ critical awareness can be part of the connectivity linking questions of disciplines, lived experiences, and systems of power.
For teachers and researchers hoping to use CPDE not just as a theoretical framework but as a concrete set of practices, this study contributes designed resources that support epistemic justice for marginalized youth. Positioning everyday experiences as education assets, and honoring the critical awareness Black and Latinx low- income youth have about their everyday experiences as belonging in school, is possible through interactional routines that model and legitimize these resources. My hope is that re-imagining and re-framing climate change teaching and learning as inherently connective with the CPDE principles can be part of the creating equitable science classrooms that are part of the solution to the climate crisis. Re-cognizing youths’ critical awareness of social issues as valuable in scientific sensemaking will be an important step in supporting socioecological justice through science education.


References
Agarwal, P., & Sengupta-Irving, T. (2019). Integrating Power to Advance the Study of Connective and Productive Disciplinary Engagement in Mathematics and Science. Cognition and Instruction, 37(3), 1-18.
Bang, M., & Vossoughi, S. (2016). Participatory design research and dducational justice: Studying kearning and relations within social change making. Cognition and Instruction, 34(3), 173-193.
Engle, R. A. (2012). The productive disciplinary engagement framework: Origins, key concepts, and developments. In Design research on learning and thinking in educational settings (pp. 161-200). Routledge.
Engle, R. A., & Conant, F. R. (2002). Guiding principles for fostering productive disciplinary engagement: Explaining an emergent argument in a Community of Learners classroom. Cognition and Instruction, 20(4), 399-483.
Erickson, F. (1986). Qualitative methods in research on teaching. In M. C. Wittrock (Ed.), Handbook of research on teaching (pp. 119-161). Macmillan.
Freire, P. (1970). Pedagogy of the Oppressed. Bloomsbury.
Ghosh, A. (2021). The Nutmeg’s Curse. University of Chicago Press.
Henderson, J. A. (2019). Learning to teach climate change as if power matters. Environmental Education Research, 25(6), 987-990.
Klaver, L. T., Sins, P. H. M., Walma van der Molen, J. H., & Guérin, L. J. F. (2023). Strengthening science education through attention to student resources: A conceptualization of socioscientific capital. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 60(5), 1162-1192.
Lehtonen, A., Salonen, A., Cantell, H., & Riuttanen, L. (2018). A pedagogy of interconnectedness for encountering climate change as a wicked sustainability problem. Journal of Cleaner Production, 199, 860-867.
NRC. (2000). How people learn: brain, mind, experience and school. N. A. Press.
Sadler, T. D. (2004). Informal reasoning regarding socioscientific issues: A critical review of research. Journal of Research in Science Teaching: The Official Journal of the National Association for Research in Science Teaching, 41(5), 513-536.
Saldaña, J. (2014). Coding and analysis strategies. In P. Leavy (Ed.), The Oxford handbook of qualitative research.
Oxford Academic.
Sandoval, W. A., & Bell, P. (2004). Design-based research methods for studying learning in context: Introduction.
Educational Psychologist, 39(4), 199-201.
Science Framework for California Public Schools. (2016). Retrieved from https://www.cde.ca.gov/ci/sc/cf/cascienceframework2016.asp
Warren, B., Ballenger, C., Ogonowski, M., Rosebery, A. S., & Hudicourt-Barnes, J. (2001). Rethinking diversity in learning science: The logic of everyday sense-making. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 38(5), 529-552.
Zangori, L., Peel, A., Kinslow, A., Friedrichsen, P., & Sadler, T. D. (2017). Student development of model-based reasoning about carbon cycling and climate change in a socio-scientific issues unit [Article]. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 54(10), 1249-1273.
Acknowledgments
This research was funded by the UCLA Graduate Division.