Critical Action Learning: Empowering Students in An Uncertain World

James D. Slotta, University of Toronto, jim.slotta@utoronto.ca Renato Carvalho, University of Toronto, renato.carvalho@utoronto.ca Preeti Raman, Toronto Metropolitan University, praman@torontomu.ca Meera Mattoo, University of Toronto, mrinalini.mattoo@mail.utoronto.ca

Abstract: This paper presents a recent whole-school study of Critical Action Learning, a form of sustained critical inquiry for K-12 classroom communities. Through partnerships in North America, Europe, and Asia, we pursue a deeper understanding of how Critical Action Learning occurs in classrooms and how it influences students, teachers, schools and communities. This paper presents a study of a school located in Bangalore, India, in which teachers and school leaders worked to adopt Critical Action Learning in numerous classrooms. We report on teacher knowledge and practice, features of curriculum, and the growth of the school community.

Introduction
This paper presents a recent whole-school study of Critical Action Learning, a form of sustained critical inquiry for K-12 classroom communities. Building on a decade of prior research on learning communities (Slotta, Quintana & Moher, 2018), the Critical Action Learning Exchange (CALE) has advanced a framework to guide the design of sustained critical inquiry, with the goal of empowering students and teachers in the face of oppressive socio-environmental issues. CALE was designed as a teacher professional learning community and has engaged hundreds of teachers in North America, Europe, and Asia. Through these partnerships, we pursue a deeper understanding of how Critical Action Learning occurs in classrooms, and how it influences students, teachers, schools and communities.
The adoption of any form of critical pedagogy requires a teacher to engage in autonomous design and enactment of curriculum, including dialogical practices and critical reflections (i.e., about what happens in the classroom and with each student). To help CALE teachers engage in such autonomous innovation and experimentation, CALE research now explores the infrastructuring (Penuel, 2019) of Critical Action Learning, including: (1) the physical and material learning environment, place-based learning, location and co-location of learning interactions, and a wide range of material and embodied interactions; (2) the role of technology in scaffolding student and teacher interactions within a community of learners, fostering critical action, and ensuring a climate of care for all participants; (3) the local and global educational context including school, district, and national level curriculum policies and expectations, as well as cultural and historical factors; (4) the journey of a teacher, including initial ideas about pedagogy and practice, pathways through curriculum design, and expectations about student experience and development; (5) interactions with the school and local community, as critical action engages teachers, school leaders, student families and the wider community. In order for CALE to succeed in its vision of supporting autonomous teacher engagement, we must understand the infrastructure of critical action and the processes through which the classroom and school community may be transformed.
This paper presents a study of one school, located in Bangalore, India, in which teachers and school leaders worked to adopt Critical Action Learning in numerous classrooms. We report on teacher knowledge and practice, physical and material elements of the learning designs, student interactions with peers, teachers, and learning environment, and the influence of such curriculum on students, teachers and school communities. We investigate how the curriculum designs utilized curriculum time and classroom space, what forms of discourse and interaction occurred, and how learning was mediated through material and embodied interactions. We also examine teachers’ professional growth, in terms of the challenges encountered and solutions explored, as well as the growth of the overall school community.
Rationale and prior research
CALE is a community of educators responding to a global scenario that has been described in increasingly dire tones. UN Secretary-General António Guterres recently referred to the current state of wars, climate crisis, growing economic inequalities and geopolitical divisions as "a confluence of challenges unlike any other in our lifetimes" (Guterres, 2023). In 2021, one of the first global-scale investigations of climate anxiety in the youth surveyed 10,000 children and young people (aged 16–25 years) in 10 different nations (Hickman et al., 2021). 60% of respondents reported being extremely worried about climate change. Over 50% reported feeling sad,

anxious, angry, powerless, helpless, and/or guilty about the climate crisis, and more than 45% said these feelings are negatively affecting their daily life and functioning. Similar effects have been attributed to other pressing issues, such as systemic racism and other forms of discrimination, war, poverty and inequality, etc. (Ridley et al., 2020; Williams, 2018). Against this worrying backdrop, a growing body of research has suggested that engaging in some form of committed collective action can be an effective way of empowering children and young people in relation to their concerns or anxieties caused by their stressful and uncertain world (Hoggett & Randall, 2018; Nairn, 2019). The high state of anxiety and passion among students is a wake-up call to educators everywhere. We must find better ways of helping our teachers help our students find meaning and purpose in learning, build strong identities as learners and future citizens, and understand the problems in their world and their lives as something they can respond to through action. This paper presents a study that deepens our understanding of how teachers adopt Critical Action Learning. By situating our study within the rich context of a single school, we can examine the interplay of factors relating to teacher knowledge, educational systems, school leadership, curricular activities, classroom interactions and physical and technological elements. This will shed light on the specific experiences of teachers and students and inform our further infrastructuring of Critical Action Learning,
Theoretical foundations
CALE draws from Knowledge Building theory and Critical Pedagogy to advance a framework for Critical Action Learning. Knowledge Building (Scardamalia & Bereiter, 2006) places a fundamental value on epistemic agency and collective responsibility, together with (a) knowledge advancement as a community rather than individual achievement; (b) knowledge advancement as idea improvement rather than as progress toward accurate or warranted belief; (c) discourse as collaborative problem-solving rather than as argumentation. These principles intersect with key ideas of Critical Pedagogy, which criticizes the traditional process of schooling as one that alienates students from their sense of agency by denying them opportunities to establish their own aims and goals, and advocates for educational ideals and practices that would empower marginalized people as transformative agents capable of lessening their oppression (Freire, 1970, Kincheloe, 2004). Freire (1970) proposed a “problem- posing model” of education that values the importance of student experience and a dialogical method of teaching and learning. While Critical Pedagogy has been celebrated by educators for more than half a century, it remains largely absent from schools today. Effective as they may be shown by research studies, most inquiry and dialogic pedagogies fail to gain wide adoption, and classrooms of today look and behave much the way they did in the 1950s (Collins & Halverson, 2018; diSessa, 2000). The reasons for this intransigence are complex and interwoven, including structural aspects (i.e., separated class topics, daily class schedules, grades, etc), as well as curriculum standards and expectations that pressure teachers to cover the breadth. Another barrier is concerned with the fundamental challenges of changing one’s professional practices, especially when situated within a strong community of practice (Lave & Wenger, 1991). The specific forms of practice required by critical inquiry methods, as well as the burden they place on curriculum time, make them quite challenging for teachers to adopt.
KCI: Knowledge Community and Inquiry
For nearly two decades, our research group has advanced the KCI model to leverage the power of collective inquiry and learning communities while ensuring coverage of content (Slotta & Peters, 2008). By designing a curriculum unit in which the classroom is conceived as a learning community where peers contribute to and receive from the wider collective, KCI guides teachers to embed inquiry and still ensure learning of content, practices and epistemic forms (Slotta, Quintana & Moher, 2018; Fong & Slotta, 2018). Technology can play an important role in helping the teacher orchestrate collective inquiry by scaffolding students in building a community knowledge base and then scaffolding their applications and extensions of that community knowledge within subsequent inquiry. Because learning community approaches are challenging for teachers to adopt, as with most forms of inquiry (Blumenfeld et al., 1994), KCI provides scaffolding through a structural model of collective inquiry, together with actionable approaches and examples.
CALE: The Critical Action Learning Exchange
In 2019, we established the Critical Action Learning Exchange (CALE) based on a key insight that the affordances (epistemological, technological, material) of a learning community approach could be helpful in supporting teachers’ adoption of critical pedagogy (Carvalho et al., 2021; 2022). We refer to this fusion of learning communities with critical pedagogy as Critical Action Learning, wherein the goal is to empower students in the face of social and environmental issues like climate change, gender inequity or economic uncertainty. CALE has developed a curriculum framework and professional development model, and has engaged hundreds of teachers from dozens of countries in professional development workshops where they design and share critical action

curricula (Carvalho et al., 2022; 2023). Over the past four years, we have established partnerships in Canada, Egypt, India and China, providing CALE with a global perspective and representation (Carvalho et al., 2022).
CALE has articulated five approaches to make Critical Action Learning more practicable and offer design pathways for teachers: (1) Arts-based Critical Action allows students to communicate abstract or complex ideas and express their identities in an intellectually and emotionally engaging way, developing richly connected understandings of the diversity of viewpoints and values among their peers (Keifer-Boyd, 2011); (2) Critical Making emphasizes the situated, context-specific, and material aspects of the design process, and helps students explore the relationship between process and product, the entanglement of theory and practice and connections between makers and communities (Ratto, 2011); (3) Critical Action Games afford simulation or enactment of distinct realities and outcomes that can be critically analyzed. Games don't need to adhere to real-world social conventions or structures, allowing experimentation with alternative realities, identities and concepts (Dhiman, 2023); (4) Storytelling allows students to craft their own stories and connect the learning with emotions, thoughts and creativity, bringing forward critical perspectives and artistic interpretations in which they interpret and respond to world issues (Burk, 2000, Honwad et al., 2020); and (5) Community Engaged Critical Inquiry engages students directly with the issues that concern them personally, cooperating with organizations and community members to generate positive transformations (Ozer, 2017; McKoy et al., 2021). For each approach, CALE has curated a set of examples and teaching strategies, to help teachers integrate the approach into their design.
A CALE framework describes Critical Action Learning along two axes: The vertical axis, “Depth,” includes three levels: (1) Knowledge, where students develop abilities to acquire, assess, and build new knowledge; (2) Criticality, in which students understand their own position in relation to forces and structures that affect the issue; (3) Action, in which students gain a sense of agency, shifting from “that's just the way things are'' to “that's a problem that I can act upon.” The horizontal axis, “Scope,” also includes three levels: (1) Individual, where students explore their own intersections with the issue, creating personal meaning and purpose in learning; (2) Community, where students recognize the value of community in any action, making some impact on their local community. (3) Globe: Students understand that problems such as climate change, social injustices and economic inequalities are global, and that their actions are connected to the wider community and world.
For each axis, CALE provides a set of scaffolding questions to guide teacher designs. These questions, together with the CALE approaches and examples, form a Design Guide that supports teachers in developing critical action curriculum units. While some teachers can use the CALE Guide autonomously, most benefit from guidance and peer collaboration for their design and enactment of critical action learning. CALE professional learning supports must be tailored and responsive to each teacher’s background, knowledge and wider context (i.e., country, culture, school, topic and student age level). CALE has developed a formative intervention model for teacher learning, following Engeström's (2011) ChangeLab, in which the teacher is engaged in reflexive dialogue concerning their current practice and their goals or vision for change (Carvalho et al., 2022).
Infrastructuring Critical Action Learning
Beyond the dissemination of ideas or resources (the approaches, framework, etc.), CALE aims to foster the co- creation of conditions in which practitioners can take ownership of those ideas. This is consistent with the notion of "infrastructuring" (Chen, 2022; Penuel, 2019), a process-oriented approach where the negotiation between users' needs and environmental affordances plays a critical role in fostering autonomous engagement of practitioners. By engaging a diverse cohort of teachers, the present study investigates two infrastructural dimensions of Critical Action Learning: (1) Teachers’ professional growth through adoption of critical action learning, and (2) Physical, material and technological elements of critical action learning environments.
Teacher professional growth
Following Jones and Swanson (2022), we understand a teacher’s readiness for pedagogical innovations in terms of their own self-efficacy and motivation (Bandura, 2001) as well as the influences that may constrain agency and prevent change (Grenny et al., 2013). For example, a teacher might be earnestly ready for innovation, but find themselves in a department, school, or broader educational climate that is averse to such change. This paper examines the tensions between teachers' interest, motivations and ability to change their practice and their perceived structural constraints or affordances for such changes.
Physical, material and technological elements of critical action learning
Any classroom learning has a physical context, which includes aspects of emplacement (i.e., in a particular room or setting), materiality (i.e., of learning materials and products), and embodiment (i.e., of student engagement, co- presence, and location-dependent learning). In previous partnerships, we have observed how teachers’ designs depend on their local context, and typically entail some physical and material elements (see Figure 1). This paper examines the role played by such elements to understand their impact on students, teachers and communities.

Figure 1


Physical, material and technological environments for Critical Action Learning.
Left: Arts-based collective mural employs out-of-doors public space and paint material; Center: Social Issues lesson in India engages students in creating Rangoli, a cultural art form using drawings on the floor made with coloured sand; Right: Students in China construct sustainable architecture designs for future cities, using critical making.
Method
Two research questions are addressed by this paper: (1) What forms of professional growth occur as teachers adopt critical action learning? This question entails the study of teachers’ incoming ideas regarding inquiry methods, student learning, and the support of students who feel oppressed and anxious in an uncertain world. We examine the curriculum designs and enactments of each teacher, as well as their change process, including engagement in critical reflections. Finally, we articulate the teacher’s broader institutional and sociocultural contexts and how those may influence their adoption of critical action learning. This includes peer interactions among teachers and leaders within the school and any form of “public intellectualism” (Giroux, 1988) in which teachers participate actively within their community. We examine the impact of these activities within a school, as measured by the uptake of ideas, level of engagement by stakeholders, and sustained critical inquiry of teachers.
(2) What are the physical, material and technological dimensions of Critical Action Learning? Specifically, we examine the role of the physical space (i.e., location of students, materials or activities), as well as the broader materiality of learning (e.g., in support of activities, design, making, community interactions, or artistic products). We also captured the role of any technology in scaffolding critical inquiry within a learning community and helping the teacher achieve a dialogic pedagogy and leverage space and material elements.
Participants and settings
Over the past several years, CALE has developed a partnership with Richmond Road Public School (RRPS) in Bangalore, India, which serves more than 1500 students (grades k-14) from low and middle-income backgrounds, and over 40% who identify as first-generation learners. More than 40 teachers at RRPS have participated in CALE workshops, nine of whom implemented Critical Action Learning curricula in their classrooms for purposes of this study. The school principal and all participating teachers have expressed an interest in continuing their journey and are active in maintaining their own communications and design processes (Carvalho et al., 2024). Participants include teachers, school leaders, and the broader community relating to our partner school in Bengaluru, India. Teachers varied greatly in terms of their backgrounds, pedagogical knowledge, experiences, motivations and readiness for change. This provides an entry point for the formative intervention and an important infrastructural dimension of teachers’ readiness for change. Participating teachers received support from school leaders as well as from the research team but remained firmly in the ownership position with regard to the design and enactment of curriculum, including the physical, material and technological aspects of the learning environment.
Material and technology environments
As illustrated in Figure 1 above, prior CALE curriculum designs have revealed a profound intersection with physical, material and technological elements. Students are in motion within the classroom, the makerspace, or out-of-doors – interacting with place and space, working with a variety of materials to embody their critical inquiry through constructed environments, community innovations, storytelling, and public galleries. While teachers and schools differ in terms of available resources and curricular requirements for space and material, there were some common material elements of arts and makerspace supplies, chart paper, writable surfaces, floor space, and furniture. With regard to technology, the school provided access to personal computers and a computer lab for teachers, as well as a smart board for video and technology presentations.
Addressing the research questions
The research questions are addressed in an interwoven fashion, using complementary methodologies. For example, to understand teachers’ trajectory in adopting Critical Action Learning (RQ1), we employ a mixed method approach including surveys, interviews, and analysis of curriculum designs and design processes. We

employed surveys of students and teachers, as well as semi-structured interviews for teachers and selected students. Prior CALE research (Carvalho et al., 2023) has developed a grounded coding of curriculum enactment, to capture the role of infrastructural elements, including the role of physical space, material interactions, embodied elements, teacher-led discourse, and technology environments. This coding yields themes and supports further qualitative analyses of curriculum designs, student-made artifacts, classroom interactions, and community-level factors. Moreover, those same analyses of curriculum design and enactment can also inform our understanding of the role of physical, material and technological elements in Critical Action Learning (RQ2). We employ design- based implementation research (DBIR) to support participating teachers through regular design meetings as they develop activities, assessments, and learning environments. We captured all designs, as well as enactments in terms of teacher and student interactions with peers, teacher, and physical, material and technological elements of the infrastructure. For each teacher, we examine (1) Curriculum design of inquiry activities, material and technology; (2) Curriculum enactment, including the role of physical space, material and technological elements, as well as the influence of the curriculum on students and teachers; and (3) Teacher journey, in which we capture the teacher’s readiness for change and their experience of working with these ideas, enacting them with students, critically reflecting on the curriculum enactment, and making plans for the next iteration.
Findings
Curriculum design outcomes
CALE researchers collaborated with 9 RRPS teachers to develop 5 lesson plans. Teachers implemented these lessons in over a two-week time span. Except for the Grade 8 Math teacher, all teachers worked in pairs. Teacher’s curriculum designs utilized four of the CALE approaches (all except Storytelling), and most combined multiple approaches. Below, we describe each design and discuss how each approach was utilized and how they connected with local issues that affect students. All teachers started from curricula prescribed by the ministry based on textbooks and expanded from their traditional methods (i.e., lecturing with the support of the textbook) to incorporate elements of collective inquiry, experiential learning and Critical Action Learning.
Urbanization - Grade 8, Social Sciences. Two teachers co-designed this lesson that built on a textbook curriculum on the concept of urbanization. The designed lesson connected the subject matter with the real issue of the accelerated growth of Bengaluru. To accomplish that, teachers mixed two CAL approaches, community engagement and critical making. Students surveyed their communities about problems created by the increased population in recent years. All students created a large collective collage together to represent these problems and possible solutions. Finally, they used critical making to create interactive models with ideas for how the city could solve those problems (Figure 2, below).
Percentage - Grade 8, Math. The Math teacher was able to expand this lesson far beyond the prescribed curriculum about the application of percentages. This lesson engaged students with the concept of smart cities. Students worked in small groups to survey their communities to identify urban problems, which they were later asked to categorize. Based on these categories, students defined sectors of their envisioned smart city in which they wanted to invest. Next, they were given a fictitious budget that they would allocate among the sectors, thus applying percentage concepts. Finally, students used Minecraft to realize their vision of a smart city (Figure 2).
Figure 2
Urbanization Unit

(Left), students engaged in critical making to demonstrate ideas of sustainable urban futures; in the percentage unit (right), students created Minecraft renditions of their ideas.
Water pollution - Grade 5, Science. This textbook curriculum focused on concepts such as solubility (i.e., the ability of two substances, the solute and the solvent, to form a solution). Teachers were able to connect this concept with the problem of water pollution, especially the pollution of local rivers. Teachers used an Arts- based approach to engage students with critical action towards this issue. First, students designed posters with

their own messages and opinions about the importance of keeping the local bodies of water clean. Teachers asked the school leadership to post pictures of the students’ posters on the school's social media channels, to amplify the impact of students' action. Students also created a dance performance about river pollution that was presented in an event that gathered the whole school community and visitors from other local schools (See Figure 3, below).
Fibre to fabric - Grade 6, Science. The textbook curriculum aimed to familiarize students with different natural fibres (i.e., cotton, wool, silk, etc.) and processes used to produce fabric. Two teachers worked on this lesson and significantly expanded it, connecting it with the issue of plastic waste, which is a serious problem for the local community. One activity of this curriculum that students found very impactful was a rally around the neighbourhood with posters about avoiding excessive plastic waste and discarding it correctly. During the rally, students also collected plastic garbage from the streets and sidewalks, engaging directly with the problem. Finally, students used the collected plastic garbage to create an artistic installation about the problem of plastic pollution and a culminating fashion show with clothes students designed using either natural fibres or recycled plastic.
Wind and Storm - Grade 7, Science. The textbook curriculum, which focuses on the processes that form wind and storms, was expanded to address the broader problem of the management of natural disasters. This was a timely subject, as (during the unit enactment) the school experienced three days of mandated closure by the government due to heavy rains and flooding. The teachers relied on experiential learning methods for this lesson, with many classroom experiments demonstrating air pressure, wind speed, etc. they also engaged students in critical making for the construction of models that demonstrated how natural disasters could affect the city, as well as some forms of prevention or remediation.
Figure 3
Water Pollution Unit

(left), students went public with posters about water pollution issues and solutions, and developed a dance performance. In the Fibre to Fabric unit (right), students engaged their local community, collecting discarded plastic waste, and creating a recycled fibre fashion show.
We analyzed how effectively these designs incorporated the CALE Framework, using a graph to show goodness of fit for each curriculum unit, to the six framework elements (Figure 4). The five units are seen to vary in terms of their fit, although there appear to be reliable relationships of strength or weakness within each unit.

Figure 4
Curriculum Designs, Showing the Level of Emphasis on Each Component of the CALE Design Framework, as Scored From 0 (None) to 3 (Extensive)

Physical, material and technological elements of the learning environment
The RRPS teachers, school leaders, students, and even the wider community can all be seen as important participants in the adoption of critical action learning. Our five co-design teams each created a lesson that reflected the particular strengths, interests, and knowledge of the respective teachers. Material and technological elements emerged as solutions within the design process, and some activities were traditional and didactic, while others

were more dialogic and inquiry-oriented. In each unit, students were supported in various forms of critical action. They participated in 21st-century competencies, problem-solving, collaboration, and communication and learned to make connections between ideas, issues, and topics for learning in school.
Classroom space was a striking element of all curriculum designs, as the physical classroom (furniture, windows, etc) has a profound impact on the kinds of teaching and learning that happen in that space. Inquiry methods (like Critical Action Learning) require flexibility. Teachers must be able to quickly rearrange the space by moving students and furniture so they can adapt to different types of individual or group work with the use of various materials. The space must allow the teacher to move freely and learn from interacting with students, and the technology support must facilitate different kinds of interactions. Unfortunately, the physical and technological infrastructure at RRPS was not ideal in this aspect. Classrooms are furnished with long and heavy benches with attached writing surfaces, which can not be easily reconfigured, and teachers tend to use the smartboard only as a whiteboard or a TV to play videos. Teachers and students alike were struck by the mismatch of form and function as soon as the didactic lecture was left behind and peer interactions became the mode of learning. Teachers resorted to any number of innovative approaches with regard to physical space, some of them utilizing hallway space or sending students to work in the library or auditorium. One outcome of the work was a new awareness of the importance of the physical space, and the school director promised to develop an innovative, active learning classroom where teachers could apply new forms of pedagogy and practice
Material was a powerful feature in all lesson designs, as students and teachers worked with various media, paper, paints, electronics, and modelling, even technology environments. All teachers utilized a smart board, although most only as a form of projector.
Another important infrastructural element was that of school leadership. From the outset, the Director, school principal and vice principal of curriculum at RRPS were all deeply involved in this partnership. CALE was brought into the school at their invitation, and they have been steadfast in their support and encouragement of teachers to adopt critical action learning. The school had a reputation as being quite stringent in support of the formal curriculum and textbook. Teachers had been instructed to follow the curriculum as a rule. However, this position shifted over the course of our study, and school leaders began talking about the curriculum as an object of inquiry and critical thinking: that teachers needed to be selective about topics and choose how to use their classroom time. Hence, school leaders have grown together with their teachers and made decisions to support the continued professional growth of all community members.
Teacher professional growth
Since 2021, CALE researchers have collaborated with RRPS teachers to develop curricula that empower students through Critical Action Learning. Over 40 teachers at the school have participated in CALE workshops over the last three years. In October 2024, CALE researchers collaborated with 9 RRPS teachers to design 5 new lessons. Teachers enacted these lessons over two weeks, with positive results. Teachers were all seen to step well outside their comfort zone: quite literally outside the “comfort zone” of the front of the classroom. Most teachers had limited experience with conducting classroom discussions, and no experience facilitating discussions that engage students’ critical thinking. Teachers universally expressed discomfort and unfamiliarity regarding such forms of discourse, yet all teachers expressed excitement that they had made progress in this area. Here, we present a case study of one teacher, Ms. Manisha (a pseudonym), focusing on her professional growth as a critical educator.
Ms. Manisha has worked at RRPS for the past seven years as a math teacher in grades 8, 9, and 10, and has participated in all design workshops and other CALE events in the Bengaluru community. In the past two years, Ms. Manisha has successfully designed and implemented two lessons using the CALE framework, with an apparent preference for the Games for Critical Action approach. This is remarkable because Games for Critical Action is the least frequently used of all five approaches we systematized, probably for being one of the most difficult to implement (Carvalho et al., 2024). Additionally, Ms. Manisha teaches math, which is also a notably challenging subject to integrate with Critical Action Learning.
The first curriculum design created by Ms. Manisha was titled “Fractional Finances,” in which she redesigned a grade 8 curriculum on fractions that was usually taught through a traditional lecture-based approach. Instead, Ms. Manisha devised a simple game in which groups of students are given different amounts of "money" (in the form of plastic beads), representing the income ranges of Indian households. Students were then asked to plan the families' budgets by allocating fractions of their income to each expense category (e.g. health, food, housing, leisure, etc.). Throughout the lesson, students were given opportunities to reflect on economic inequalities, career choices, and the cost of living by comparing the budget of each different “family.”
The second design developed by Ms. Manisha expanded a prescribed curriculum about the application of percentages to engage students with the concept of smart cities. In this lesson, students worked in small groups to survey their communities to identify urban problems, which they were later asked to categorize. Based on these

categories, students defined sectors of their envisioned smart city in which they wanted to invest. Next, they were given a fictitious budget that they would allocate among the sectors, thus applying percentage concepts. Finally, students used the game Minecraft to realize their vision of a smart city. Besides improving as a designer, Ms. Manisha has also engaged with conceptual and theoretical understandings of Critical Action Learning. She articulates the importance of students developing an “understanding of social issues and social awareness” and sees critical action learning as an approach that helps to “link the subject matter with social issues.” This has led Ms. Manisha to assume a leadership role within the Bengaluru teacher community, which will be instrumental in future efforts to expand the community to other local schools.
Discussion
Teachers at RRPS encountered four main challenges during this project: the first was that of curriculum time, relating to the trade-off between depth and breadth of coverage. Teachers did not see enough time for large inquiry units, with the looming presence of exams. Also, they had a difficult time creating lesson designs that replaced the lecture, rather than just complementing it. The second main challenge was that of designing activities and assessments. Teachers had little experience in creating activities that engage students and still have them learning content and competencies. They were challenged to keep the content learning centred within their designs, such that students would not get distracted by art projects or community trips. The third key challenge was that of interacting with students. Many teachers expressed frustration that students would not speak within class, and could not be engaged in critical discussions. Students, just as teachers, are accustomed to more traditional forms of teaching and learning. Some feel nervous or shy and do not want to talk. All of the teachers found this challenge to be an important focus of future professional development. The final challenge was that of using the physical and material space and most teachers found themselves thinking creatively to make the best out of the physical limitations described above. Many solutions were advanced in relation to these challenges. There was creative use of time around major holidays where students brought cultural elements into their activities. Teachers found the CALE approaches to be helpful, referring to the associated examples and other materials. In several cases, multiple content areas were connected within a single curriculum unit, allowing a sense of curriculum integration.
Teachers and school leaders agreed, at the end of this study, to make continued professional progress on these four challenges. With regard to curriculum time, every teacher should be a critical thinker about curriculum requirements, and about helping students learn more deeply. Teachers resolve to “think of themselves as learners and experimenters,” trying new activities to see what works best. They also committed to updating their designs based on things they noticed not to be working, and to collaborate with peers and mentors wherever possible. With regard to student interactions there was some insight about possible “quick methods" that can be used at any point in time, such as think-pair-share and reflective discussion. It was recognized that students and teachers would get accustomed to these, promoting a more general climate of dialogue and communication. It was also clear to all teachers that practice would be helpful: in asking questions, encouraging students to express their ideas, and in their own learning from students.
References
Bandura, A. (2001). Social cognitive theory: An agentic perspective. Annual review of psychology, 52(1), 1-26. Blumenfeld, P. C., Krajcik, J. S., Marx, R. W., & Soloway, E. (1994). Lessons learned: How collaboration helped middle-grade science teachers learn project-based instruction. The Elementary School Journal, 94(5),
539-551.
Burk, N. M. (2000). Empowering at-risk students: storytelling as a pedagogical tool.
Carvalho, R., Ghasempour, E., Khan, R., Slotta, J., Raman, P., Zhang, X., Chen, J., Chen, X., Soodhani, N., Dasgupta, S. (2023). Teacher Professional Development in Critical Action Pedagogy: A Culturally Responsive Approach. Proceedings of the International Society of the Learning Sciences (ISLS) Annual Meeting 2023, Montreal, Canada.
Carvalho, R., Raman, P., Boldyreva, E., Ndubuisi, A., Burron, G., Zhang, X., Ghasempour, E., Wilton, L., Slotta,
J. (2021). Designing a Global Community of Critical Action Educators. Proceedings of the International Society of the Learning Sciences (ISLS) Annual Meeting 2021, Bochum, Germany.
Carvalho, R., Raman, P., Ghasempour, E., Zhang, X., Boldyreva, E., Slotta, J. (2022). Becoming a Critical Action Educator: A Comparative Analysis of Formative Interventions in Canada, China, and India. Proceedings of the International Society of the Learning Sciences (ISLS) Annual Meeting 2022, Hiroshima, Japan.
Carvalho, R., Raman, P., Mahajan, A., Sharma, M., Tewfik, C., Lee, Y., Khan, R., Ndubuisi, A., Ghasempour, E., Zhao, N., Slotta, J. (2024). Teaching Future-Makers: Outcomes of an International Design Workshop for Critical Action Educators. Proceedings of the International Society of the Learning Sciences (ISLS) Annual Meeting 2024, Buffalo, USA.

Chen, B. (2022). Toward a framework of infrastructuring for sustainable educational innovations.
Collins, A., & Halverson, R. (2018). Rethinking education in the age of technology: The digital revolution and schooling in America. Teachers College Press.
Dhiman, D. B. (2023). Games as Tools for Social Change Communication: A Critical Review. Global Media Journal, 21, 61.
DiSessa, A. A. (2000). Changing minds: Computers, learning, and literacy. MIT Press.
Engeström, Y. (2011). From design experiments to formative interventions. Theory& Psychology, 21, 598-628.
Fong, C. & Slotta, J.D. (2018). Supporting communities of learners in the elementary classroom: The common knowledge learning environment. Instructional Science, 46(4), 533-561.
Freire, P. (1970). Pedagogy of the oppressed (MB Ramos, Trans.). New York: Continuum, 2007.
Giroux, H. A. (1988). Teachers as intellectuals: Toward a critical pedagogy of learning. Massachusetts: Bergin & Garvey Publishers, Inc.
Grenny, J., Patterson, K., Maxfield, D., McMillan, R., & Switzler, A. (2013). Influencer: The new science of leading change. New York: McGraw-Hill Education.
Guterres, A. (2023, February 6). Secretary-General's briefing to the General Assembly on Priorities for 2023.
Retrieved September 23, 2023
Hickman, C., Marks, E., Pihkala, P., Clayton, S., Lewandowski, R. E., Mayall, E. E., ... & van Susteren, L. (2021). Climate anxiety in children and young people and their beliefs about government responses to climate change: a global survey. The Lancet Planetary Health, 5(12), e863-e873.
Hoggett, P., & Randall, R. (2018). Engaging with climate change: Comparing the cultures of science and activism.
Environmental Values, 27(3), 223-243.
Honwad, S., Coppens, A. D., DeFrancis, G., Montshire, M. S., & Bhattarai, S. (2020). Weaving strands of knowledge: Leaning about environmental change in the Bhutan Himalayas. The journal Nordic Museology.
Jones, B., & Swanson, H. (2022). A framework for assessing teachers’ readiness for pedagogical transformation. In Proceedings of the International Society of the Learning Sciences (ISLS) Annual Meeting 2022, Hiroshima, Japan: International Society of the Learning Sciences.
Keifer-Boyd, K. (2011). Arts-based research as social justice activism: Insight, inquiry, imagination, embodiment, relationality. International Review of Qualitative Research, 4(1), 3-19.
Kincheloe, J. L. (2004). Critical pedagogy. New York, NY: Peter Lang.
Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge University Press. McKoy, D. L., Eppley, A., & Buss, S. (2021). Planning cities with young people and schools: Forging justice,
generating joy. Routledge.
Nairn, K. (2019). Learning from young people engaged in climate activism: The potential of collectivizing despair and hope. Young, 27(5), 435-450.
Ozer, E. J. (2017). Youth-led participatory action research: Overview and potential for enhancing adolescent development. Child Development Perspectives, 11(3), 173-177
Penuel, W. R. (2019). Co-design as infrastructuring with attention to power: Building collective capacity for equitable teaching and learning through design-based implementation research. Collaborative curriculum design for sustainable innovation and teacher learning, 387-401.
Ratto, M. (2011). Critical making: Conceptual and material studies in technology and social life. The Information Society, 27(4), 252-260.
Ridley, M. W., Rao, G., Schilbach, F., & Patel, V. H. (2020). Poverty, Depression, and Anxiety: Causal Evidence and Mechanisms (No. w27157). National Bureau of Economic Research.
Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (2006). Knowledge building: Theory, pedagogy, and technology. The Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences, 97–115.
Slotta, J. D., & Peters, V. L. (2008). A blended model for knowledge communities: Embedding scaffolded inquiry. International Perspectives in the Learning Sciences: Cre8ing a learning world. Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference for the Learning Sciences Utrecht. pp. 343-350. International Society of the Learning Sciences (ISLS).
Slotta, J., Quintana, R., & Moher, T. (2018). Collective Inquiry in Communities of Learners. In the International Handbook of the Learning Sciences. (F. Fischer, C. Hmelo-Silver, P. Reimann, & S. Goldman, Eds.). Routledge.
Williams, D. R. (2018). Stress and the mental health of populations of color: Advancing our understanding of race-related stressors. Journal of health and social behavior, 59(4), 466-485.