Personal Authentic, Expansively Framed, and Culturally Sustaining Cybersecurity and STEM Education
Daniel T. Hickey, Indiana University, dthickey@iu.edu Ronald J. Kantor, Kantor Consulting, ron@kantorconsulting.com
Abstract: A 2021 expert consensus study report from the US National Academies of Sciences highlighted personal authenticity to improve computing education. Forming personal connections with new content is consistent with culturally sustaining pedagogy and other asset-based approaches for teaching marginalized learners. This is also consistent with the situative design principles for expansive framing from Randi Engle (1965-2012). The report contrasted personally authentic learning with the more common professionally authentic learning associated with socio- constructivist approaches such as problem-based learning. Our theoretical integration and example curricula use cybersecurity education to illustrate the synergy between personally authentic learning, expansive framing, and culturally relevant pedagogy. We extend Engle’s five explanations of expansive framing to incorporate personal authenticity and culturally relevant pedagogy, all supporting generative learning that transfers readily and widely.

Introduction
A restrictive educational “pipeline” created a cybersecurity workforce in the US and most Western countries that is overwhelmingly white or Asian and male, mirroring the broader computing workforce (Mountrouidou et al., 2019). Beyond the concerns over access and justice, this has implications for the shortage of cybersecurity professionals (see Furnell, 2021). We use cybersecurity education to illustrate how prevailing “professionally authentic” approaches like problem-based learning might be transformed to be more welcoming to diverse learners and ensure generative learning for all learners that transfers readily and widely. These transformations entail personal authenticity, expansive framing, and culturally sustaining pedagogy. We draw on (a) a recent cycle of design-based research (DBR) creating an online cybersecurity course for K-12 network administrators, (b) our consulting experience, and (c) a hypothetical undergraduate curriculum. Cybersecurity learning must transfer because students are being trained to prepare for and respond to new attacks with unknown parameters.
Authenticity’s importance was elevated by Brown, Collins, and Duguid’s (1989). That paper introduced many to situated cognition and helped catalyze the learning sciences. They wrote that “activities of a domain are framed by its culture. Their meaning and purpose are socially constructed through negotiations among present and past members….These coherent, meaningful, and purposeful activities are authentic, according to the definition of the term we use here” (p. 34, emphasis original). Particularly via Jan Herrington’s work, many now equate situated cognition with authentic learning. For example, Herrington and Oliver (1999) articulated the characteristics of their situated learning framework as “(a) an authentic context; (b) complex authentic activities;
(c) multiple perspectives; (d) expert performances; (e) coaching and scaffolding; (f) opportunities for collaboration, reflection, and articulation; and (g) authentic assessment” (p. 5, emphasis added; see also Herrington et al., 2014). Of course, waves of increasingly powerful learning technologies offered many new opportunities in this regard.
Such “expert” authenticity is consistent with socio-constructivist approaches like problem-based learning (Hmelo-Silver, 2004), a prominent innovation in cybersecurity and STEM education (e.g., Deng et al., 2021) Expert authenticity is consistent with Bruner’s (1960) "spiral curriculum" argument that “any subject can be taught effectively in some intellectually honest form to any child at any stage of development” (p. 33). Granted, this involved “representing the structure of that subject in terms of the child’s way of viewing things” (p. 33), but the structure itself—the frame—derived primarily from the subject (or discipline), not from the learner’s worldview. This view of authenticity is widespread and often taken for granted. In the first Handbook of the Learning Sciences, editor Keith Sawyer’s introductory chapter stated that “one of the central themes underlying the learning sciences is that students learn deeper knowledge when they engage in activities that are similar to the everyday practices of professionals who work in a discipline” (p. 4). In cybersecurity education, Manson and Pike (2014) make the “case for depth” via instruction that “focuses on the ability to apply effectively one’s knowledge and
skills to an authentic real-world problem” (p. 51, emphasis added).
Expert authenticity overlooks Dewey’s (1915/1990) concern that curriculum is often disconnected from students’ lived experiences. Dewey argued that instruction should follow from each learner’s interests and experiences. We argue for an approach to authenticity that is more consistent with Dewey’s perspective. We advance three core arguments about authentic instruction. Each concerns our goal of “generative learning” that transfers readily and widely to new education, personal or professional settings, as acknowledged by the entire

range of transfer theories (see Detterman and Sternberg, 1993). Our first argument is that professionally authentic environments will likely be unwelcoming to learners from marginalized and non-professional communities.
Our second argument is that personal authenticity is consistent with the situative design principles from Randi Engle (1965-2012) for productive disciplinary engagement (PDE, Engle & Conant, 2002) and expansive framing (Engle, 2006). We support this argument by extending five explanations of why expansive framing should support generative learning in Engle et al. (2012). More specifically, we show how these five explanations for learning transfer are directly applicable to personal authenticity. This offers a useful framework for supporting and studying personal authenticity in cybersecurity education and beyond.
Building on our recent review (Freedman et al. 2025), our third argument is that personal authenticity and expansive framing are also consistent with asset-based responses such as culturally sustaining pedagogy (Paris, 2012) and Funds of Identity (Esteban-Guitart & Moll, 2014). We believe that personal authenticity and expansive framing provide powerful theoretical frameworks for understanding engagement and transfer in these approaches and useful design principles for supporting engagement and transfer in these approaches. We support this argument by extending the five explanations of expansive framing to asset-based pedagogy. We do so by drawing on the critique and extension of PDE in Agarwal and Sengupta-Irving (2019). We believe this offers a promising new framework for supporting and studying asset-based instruction and ensuring that it supports generative learning that transfers confidently to mainstream and non-mainstream contexts. We further believe that our cybersecurity education examples below generalize to computing education, STEM education, and beyond.

Personal vs. professional authenticity
A 2021 report from the US National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine (NASEM) shed important new light on authenticity. The NASEM publishes "consensus study reports" that capture the agreement of internationally recognized experts regarding nationally important topics. The 2021 report, Cultivating Interest and Competency in Computing: Authentic Experiences and Design Factors, was written by a committee that included prominent learning scientists Barbara Means (co-chair), Victor Lee, and Mimi Itow. The committee investigated how authentic learning contexts might foster computing success for students from historically underrepresented groups in STEM. They acknowledged that authentic instruction has conventionally implied inquiry-based or problem-based learning approaches. However, the committee problematized authenticity by asking, “authentic to whom?” (p. x). They highlighted that conventional approaches emphasize “professional authenticity," which describes "practices that are like those used by professionals in computing” (p. 30). The report cautioned that “professional practices in computing reflect a history and disciplinary culture that tends to exclude women and other marginalized groups such as Black, Latinx, and Indigenous learners (p. 32).
To address this, the committee proposed focusing on personally authentic experiences, which is “when the activity is personally or culturally meaningful in the mind of the learner” (p. 30). This aligns with the evolving theories of human learning, as seen in the shifts in title and content across two prior consensus study reports: How People Learn: Mind, Brain, Experience, and Schooling (National Research Council, 1999) and How People Learn II: Learners, Contexts, and Cultures (NASEM, 2018). The latter report pointed out that “what has become far clearer since HPL I was published is that every individual’s learning is influenced by the particular context in which that person is situated” (p. 22) and included a new chapter on Context and Culture. The situative theories we embrace are perhaps the most distinct outcome of this enhanced focus on context and culture in education.

Personal authenticity and asset-based pedagogy
The NASEM computing report explored various personally authentic approaches to computing and STEM education, drawing on culturally relevant and sustaining pedagogies (i.e., Ladson-Billings, 1995; Paris, 2012) that are grounded in sociocultural and situative learning theories. These asset-based approaches recognize diverse cultures and backgrounds as strengths to be integrated rather than shortcomings to be “remediated” or overcome. These pedagogies help diverse learners “transfer in” their unique cultural and linguistic experiences and use that knowledge to help frame and contextualize their school learning. As Ladson-Billing (1995) influentially pointed out, making instruction relevant to students’ cultural backgrounds is “just good teaching.” These pedagogies become controversial in some quarters given that racism is one answer to Ladson-Billing’s follow-up question, “why so little of it seems to be occurring in classrooms populated by African American students” (p. 159). Neri et al. (2019) describe resistance to these pedagogies as a “multilevel problem that stems from (a) limited understanding, and belief in the efficacy, of CRE and (b) a lack of know-how needed to execute it” (p. 202). Neri and colleagues reviewed research on educators’ “problematic and unrealistic ideas about race and culture” behind this resistance, including naturalization, cultural racism, minimization of racism, and abstract liberalism. We believe that expansive framing offers a new way of thinking about personally authentic and culturally relevant instruction that might help overcome this resistance.

Paris’ (2012) culturally sustaining pedagogy is particularly relevant to supporting equitable generative learning that transfers readily and widely to diverse new settings. Paris argued that enduring racism “requires that our pedagogies be more than responsive of or relevant to the cultural experiences and practices of young people.” This means that “it requires that they support young people in sustaining the cultural and linguistic competence of their communities while simultaneously offering access to dominant cultural competence” (p. 95, emphasis changed). This dominant cultural competence is necessary for all learners to gain access to valued opportunities for education, advancement, and employment. However, a culturally sustaining curriculum embraces cultural and linguistic differences in a way that ensures that school learning transfers to minoritized contexts as well.
Personal authenticity, expansive framing, and productive disciplinary engagement While the NASEM computing report did not specifically reference it, personal authenticity, as defined in the report, appears entirely consistent with PDE and expansive framing. Engle and Conant (2002) introduced PDE to explain compelling discussions in a science classroom, focusing on discourse rather than mental processes. Engagement here means students actively contribute, coordinate with others, and aim to understand the content better. Engagement is productive when students’ contributions grow more sophisticated, raise questions, and make connections. Engle and Conant identified four PDE design principles that they concluded contributed to the impressive engagement they observed. First and foremost, the innovative curricula helped students problematize content from their own personal perspectives. This encourages student questions and contributions over rote learning while also not requiring them to initially embrace an expert/professional perspective. Second, students were granted authority to address the problems that emerged, fostering agency. Third, the curriculum helped foster appropriate accountability. Students were first accountable to similar peers, then more advanced peers, then teachers, and only later to disciplinary standards and eventually experts. Finally, the curriculum provided relevant resources to accomplish the first three principles.
In a 2006 article in the inaugural volume in the Learning Transfer strand of the Journal of the Learning Sciences, Engle reanalyzed the 2002 data to explain the impressive transfer those students demonstrated on a delayed performance assessment using a very different science context. Engle looked beyond the prevailing focus on the transfer of content by considering the social aspects of both the learning and transfer contexts. Engle analyzed how learners built disciplinary knowledge by finding “common ground” in class discussions. Engle showed that ensuring shared understanding within the group could impact how individuals transfer that learning to new settings. The 2006 study found that students who engaged socially and used resources effectively better transferred their learning to the complex transfer performance assessment. Importantly, this new theory of transfer also considered whether members of that initial common ground group were present in the transfer context.
Intercontextuality (Bloome et al., 2009) is central to Engle’s ideas about transfer. This is where learners form numerous connections with outside people, places, topics, and times. This positions learners as “authors” who are contributing new knowledge to an extended conversation that extends over space and time. This is akin to what skilled writers experience when they attain “flow.” Just as skilled writers are very knowledgeable about their topics, even young learners are de facto experts regarding their own experiences, relationships, values, and goals. Engle argued that students should be pushed and supported to find as many connections as possible with their lives and what they are being asked to learn.
In a 2011 tutoring study, Engle et al. examined how expansively framed learning of the cardiovascular system transferred to assessments of the respiratory system. Learners in the expansive framing condition made connections to various settings and contexts beyond the tutoring session and were positioned as originators of ideas. In contrast, those in the “bounded framing” condition stayed within the session’s content, acting as “spokespersons” for provided texts. Expansively framed learners showed significantly better problem-solving transfer. However, we see two significant threats to the validity of these findings in support of expansive framing. The first internal threat is that Engle was the tutor in both conditions and might have been (consciously or not) biased. The second external threat concerns generalizability. The NASEM computing report suggests that professional authenticity is a more appropriate comparison condition for expansive framing. Cognitive- associationist theories (e.g., Singley & Anderson, 1989) and multimedia learning theory (Mayer, 2002) argue for introducing new content in an isolated (i.e., bounded) context (to minimize cognitive load). However, they argue that broader framing contexts should be introduced later (as “conditional” knowledge or as “real world contexts”). Our in-progress systematic review of 75 peer-reviewed publications that were judged to “engage substantively” with expansive framing uncovered just eleven studies that included control or comparison conditions, with just two using random assignment to condition. One goal of this paper is to spark new research that yields evidence that might convince skeptics to consider personally authentic, culturally sustaining instruction.

Connective and poductive disciplinary engagement
Our search for synergy between Engle’s design principles and culturally sustaining pedagogy is informed by a critique of PDE by Agarwal and Sengupta-Irving (2019). They highlighted that while PDE’s first principle (problematizing) should engage diverse knowledge and identities, it often falls short as minoritized students are frequently marginalized within disciplinary discourse by majoritized teachers and peers (Esmonde & Booker, 2017). They revisited the four PDE principles to argue that: (1) problematizing by challenging dominant ways of knowing may incite racialized conflict; (2) intellectual authority can be overshadowed by social authority; (3) gaining authority isn’t enough without accountability to revise racialized meaning; and (4) minoritized students may struggle to connect disciplinary resources with culturally embedded meanings.
In response, Agarwal and Sengupta-Irving introduced Connective and Productive Disciplinary Engagement (CPDE) building on two themes of power: epistemic diversity (how dominant ways of knowing often marginalize non-dominant knowledge) and historicity & identity (acknowledging that minoritized students are often under-valued by teachers and classmates). They offered guiding questions to illustrate how educators can
(a) recognize diverse forms of knowledge, (b) examine positional dynamics in the classroom, and (c) introduce political uncertainties to invite minoritized learners to position themselves as having uniquely valuable experiences and (therefore) expertise. We applied these guiding questions in the next section,

Five arguments for expansively framed, personally authentic, culturally sustaining cybersecurity education
The continuing program of design-based research introduced in Hickey and Rehak (2013) embedded the PDE and expansive framing design principles within a situative “multilevel assessment framework that emerged in earlier STEM education research (Hickey et al., 2003; Hickey & Zuiker, 2012). This resulted in five new design principles for “participatory” learning and assessment to support generative learning. Hickey et al. (2020a) transformed those design principles into fifteen discrete steps for instructional designers grounded in cognitive theory; Hickey et al. (2025) extended these design principles and steps using the CPDE framework to make them more culturally sustaining. Space limitations preclude us from repeating or elaborating on these design principles. Rather, we draw on our experiences creating a self-paced cybersecurity course for K-12 network administrators (Hickey et al., 2020b) and an imagined undergraduate cybersecurity degree to illuminate (a) the instructional implications of our latest framework, (b) the five explanations of expansive framing for transfer in Engle et al. (2012), and (c) how this approach might support engagement and transfer for all learners (including marginalized learners). As a caveat, we remind readers that these five explanations work together; each alone may not adequately support generative learning.
Explanation 1: Intercontextuality between settings supports strategic learning
The first explanation of why expansive framing and personal authenticity support generative learning is that they afford more intercontextuality between contexts during learning. If so, students will more fully imagine how they will use what they are learning in the future. This imagining should lead them to adopt more active and effective learning strategies. Consider, for example, the K-12 analysts’ assignment exploring different attack vectors (e.g., domain name system, denial of service, etc.). If learners successfully problematize this knowledge using their network, the activity becomes less of an “assignment” and becomes more of an integral aspect of the workplace. If so, learners should use more effective learning strategies, monitor their thinking, etc., rather than just completing the exercise. Similarly, in our imagined degree program, this explanation suggests that students should connect course concepts with real networks (e.g., in their home and university) and imagined future workplace networks (e.g., healthcare, banking, education, military, etc.). If this is successful, they should adopt more effective learning strategies because they see value in the content.
Extending this explanation with CPDE suggests students problematize their learning using personally relevant political uncertainties of underserved communities and communities of color. Thus, we might have extended assignments in the K-12 analysts’ course to invite consideration of the cybersecurity challenges facing underserved K-12 students forced to rely on public hotspots or cell phones rather than family home networks and computers. Similarly, our undergraduates might imagine helping Black Lives Matter activists fend off Internet trolls (Scroxton, 2020) or investigate the source of anonymous racist email attacks at universities (Jiménez, 2021). These invitations help students who identify with these communities better imagine using what they are learning in the future; if so, this should encourage them to use more metacognitive and active learning strategies.

Explanation 2: Recognizing relevance in transfer contexts
The second closely related explanation concerns learners’ engagement in subsequent transfer contexts. If initial

learning is expansively framed and personally authentic, learners should be more likely to recognize the relevance of the learned content in future transfer contexts. This should occur because learners likely considered those contexts during initial learning. If the K-12 analysts successfully used their own network to problematize their learning of different attack vectors and threat actors, they are more likely to recognize the relevance of that knowledge when securing their network in the future. A similar thing should happen if we help our undergraduates envision a range of workplace networking contexts where they might apply what they were learning in classes. If they later enter one of those contexts, they are more likely to recognize opportunities to transfer what they learned previously. This is consistent with the notion of “preparedness” in defense and other cybersecurity contexts.
This recognition of later transfer opportunities is enhanced when nuanced differences between imagined future scenarios further problematize instructional content. For example, most undergraduates should readily appreciate why state-sponsored actors are more relevant for classmates interested in defense and why criminal actors are more relevant for classmates interested in finance. Such observations set up a nuanced discussion of various actor x vector combinations. For example, why might a state-sponsored actor launch a denial of service? Starting with the most personally authentic interactions should prepare learners to recognize professionally authentic interactions in the workplace, including actors and vectors the class did not consider. We reiterate this point because skeptics might worry about the accuracy of learners’ prior experiences (1).
One of the reasons that CPDE suggests using political uncertainties is that it helps curb undue social authority that comes with power and privilege. Consider the possible outcomes of discussing strategies for protecting minoritized activists from Internet trolls. This means that all students will be more likely to recognize opportunities to transfer what they learned about securing an assortment of networks from trolls—regardless of troll motivation. Such discussion might lead learners to discuss an even broader range of personal security contexts (e.g., witness protection, spousal abuse victims, etc.). This would lead to a broader range of contexts where learners might recognize relevance and help transfer that prior learning.

Explanation 3: Increased transfer-in of prior experience
The third explanation concerns the learning that happens when learners relate prior contexts and experiences to learning contexts and position themselves as authors of their own ideas. Doing so should lead students to transfer in more of their prior knowledge. This prior knowledge should transfer in for two reasons. The first reason is that students will more likely see the relevance of their prior knowledge in learning settings. The second reason is that students should recognize that their unique prior knowledge is helpful to others. If so, this knowledge is socially valuable. Consider, for example, an older degreed university I.T. employee enrolled in a course in our imagined degree program for career advancement. If classmates are using the familiar university network to problematize course content, the employee could share additional unique knowledge of that network with classmates. To the extent that others recognize the value of that knowledge, the employee would be encouraged to transfer in more. This focus on transfer-in (versus "prior knowledge") is perhaps the most distinctive element of situative transfer theory and a key reason why personal authenticity should support generative learning.
Consistent with CPDE, political uncertainties involving race, class, and power invite disenfranchised students to position themselves as having uniquely useful experiences that more advantaged classmates can learn from. The research reviewed in NASEM (2021) explores ways of leveraging students’ racial, cultural, and gendered identities in ways that might be readily extended to cybersecurity education (e.g., Pinkard et al., 2018). Like the activist vs. trolls example, this work draws on diverse cultural practices likely to be salient among students who have traditionally been excluded from or discouraged by cybersecurity education. To the extent that they are successful, these efforts invite diverse students to transfer-in their unique experiences and identities, allowing others to recognize their value. It is worth noting that the Funds of Identity (FoI, Estaban-Guitart & Moll, 2014) is an extension of the predecessor Funds of Knowledge to accommodate the socially networked digital identities that most learners now bring. We contend that the various FoI strategies reviewed by Hogg and Volman (2020) are helpful starting points for designing cybersecurity and STEM instruction that encourage diverse students to transfer in and use more of their unique cultural and linguistic assets to help themselves and peers learn.

Explanation 4: Increased accountability to content encourages transfer of that content
Helping students position themselves as authors should foster accountability to content. The “ownership” of knowledge generated in personally authentic activities engenders confidence in using that knowledge later. If the K-12 network analysts successfully problematized their learning using their own school’s network, they will have authored new knowledge at that intersection. This authoring should generate the sense of authority needed to confidently transfer that knowledge later and apply it to new networks and contexts.

Similarly, imagine that our undergraduates first learned crucial “adversarial thinking” by hacking their familiar home network. This makes it more likely that they will author insights about adversarial thinking that are unique among their classmates (because the insights involve their own network). This should foster accountability for their initial learning of adversarial thinking. This accountability should help them confidently transfer that initial learning of adversarial thinking to more complex networks in advanced courses. This illustrates how authoring personally authentic (and even potentially incorrect or incomplete) knowledge and getting feedback prepares learners to later author professionally authentic (i.e., technically more correct) knowledge.
When the CPDE principles and political uncertainties allow minoritized students to position themselves as authors of unique insights regarding course content, their sense of responsibility for sharing (i.e., transferring) that knowledge should apply to a wider range of transfer contexts. Significantly, the CPDE accountability principle distinguishes between implicit and explicit accountability. In our undergraduate example, implicit accountability could be supported by the instructors’ informal assessment of student discourse and access to relevant disciplinary resources regarding political uncertainties. Returning to our example of activists vs. trolls, our initial search found many potential resources beyond the aforementioned article by Scroxton (2020). Providing students with easy access to carefully curated collections of such resources would further support accountability for that content; providing advanced resources for more motivated students should support additional authority over that content, which should further support transfer.
In contrast to implicit accountability, explicit accountability presents more significant challenges. For example, should formative classroom assessments and summative exams in our imagined undergraduate class include questions about securing activists from trolls and other disciplinary uncertainties? Solano-Flores and Nelson-Barber (2001) advanced guidelines for “culturally valid” tests that reflect the “life context and values” of minoritized learners. However, they caution that “identifying the experiences that are representative of the cultural context of a given group of students can be extremely difficult.” (p. 564-565). This risk is even greater for educators designing assessments, where bias-review panels are seldom available, and representations are fixed.
Hickey et al. (2025) describe a potential resolution that minimizes the risk of tokenizing/stereotyping minoritized students or sidelining majoritized students while holding all accountable for the facts behind relevant political uncertainties. A graduate-level course on educational assessment included political uncertainties as one option in each assignment, alongside a non-political uncertainty (e.g., overuse of ineffective test prep strategies during the school day in minority-serving institutions versus the overall effectiveness of test preparation). The assignment text and formative assessments included the basic facts behind both uncertainties. This helped all students quickly learn both sets of facts, even though they only completed one of the two options. The graded summative exam then included a sample of those facts. Analyses of self-assessments revealed that most students who consistently completed the self-assessments for both controversies answered the corresponding exam questions correctly. An interview with an African American student confirmed that she appreciated being invited to share her unique, relevant experiences but never felt expected or required to represent. Meanwhile, none of the (several) openly conservative students objected to the political uncertainties in the anonymous course evaluation (though one complained bitterly about being "forced" to learn about racial bias in an assigned chapter).
Explanation 5: Multiple experiences authoring content generalizes to other content Generalizing from the fourth explanation, students who position themselves as authors in multiple learning contexts should ultimately generalize authoring beyond the content and context. In other words, multiple experiences authoring new knowledge should result in a more general disposition toward authorship. This disposition should generalize to other contexts and for other content, independent of the setting where students “became” authors. Rather than giving up on hard problems, this authority should increase self-efficacy and lead students to generate new knowledge. This generalization might follow from authoring enough experiences in one context. However, this sense of authority should generalize much further from multiple authoring experiences in multiple learning contexts. Consider, for example, K-12 analysts who complete the entire suite of four expansively framed, personally authentic courses (including Wired Network, Wireless Networking, and Procurement). They would experience dozens of opportunities to author new insights in each course. This experience makes it more likely that the learner feels a sense of authority for content beyond those courses (e.g., designing a new network for an entire school district). The same would hold for our undergraduates if personal authenticity offered them multiple opportunities to author new knowledge across multiple courses.
The systemic racism in computing education documented by Margolis et al. (2008/2018) and Vakil (2020) means that some minoritized undergraduates will have never successfully positioned themselves as de- facto experts in their cybersecurity or computing coursework. If so, even a few opportunities for recognition as local experts should help boost their confidence in authoring new knowledge. Similarly, an undergraduate degree program that includes political uncertainties across multiple courses could offer minoritized learners multiple

opportunities to position themselves as local experts. This experience should make them confident in authoring new knowledge in multiple new settings. Perhaps most importantly, a sufficient number of such experiences should extend to authoring new knowledge in contexts that require dominant cultural competence (including proficiency tests) and contexts calling for competence in their identity community.

Implications and next steps
In summary, we have argued that educators in cybersecurity, computing, and beyond should consider personally authentic, culturally sustaining approaches to support productive engagement and generative learning for all students. While there is limited empirical support for expansive framing, there is extensive research supporting asset-based pedagogy (e.g., Aronson & Laughter, 2016; Hogg & Volman, 2020). Given the national imperative to broader participation in computing education and beyond in NASEM (2021), such transformations are needed. Looking forward, Engle et al. (2012) offer three research designs for studying their five explanations of expansive framing, in isolation or combination. We believe that disentangling studies are first needed to validate the claim that specific personally authentic culturally sustaining practices support generative learning, focusing on just one or two explanations. Given that social aspects of both learning and transfer context are factors in this
new vision of generative learning, complex longitudinal whole-class comparison studies are ultimately needed.
End notes
(1) We have found that some instructors worry that such problematizing lead student to "teach each other things that are wrong" (e.g., in the example at Uttamchandani et al,, 2015). To the extent that this expert/professional authenticity discourages meaningful engagement, such authenticity may be irrelevant at best. We further contend that expansively framed engagement will support the learning needed to later appreciate why, for example, experts might not use particular concepts in particular contexts.

References
Agarwal, P., & Sengupta-Irving, T. (2019). Integrating power to advance the study of connective and productive disciplinary engagement in mathematics and science. Cognition & Instruction, 37(3), 349-366.
Aronson, B., & Laughter, J. (2016). The theory and practice of culturally relevant education: A synthesis of research across content areas. Review of Educational Research, 86 (1), 163-206.
Bloome, D., Beierle, M., Grigorenko, M., & Goldman, S. (2009). Learning over time: Uses of intercontextuality, collective memories, and classroom chronotypes in the construction of learning opportunities in a ninth- grade language arts classroom. Language and Education, 23(4), 313-334.
Brown, J. S., Collins, A., & Duguid, P. (1989). Situated cognition and the culture of learning. Educational Researcher,18 (1), 32-42.
Bruner, J. S. (1960). The process of education. Harvard University Press.
Cognition and Technology Group at Vanderbilt. (1992). The Jasper series as an example of anchored instruction: Theory, description, and assessment data. Educational Psychologist, 27(3), 291-315.
Deng, Y., Zeng, Z., Jha, K., & Huang, D. (2021). Problem-based cybersecurity lab with knowledge graph as guidance. Journal of Artificial Intelligence and Technology, 2, 55-61.
Detterman, D. K. (1993). Transfer on trial: Intelligence, cognition, and instruction. Ablex
Dewey, J. (1915/1990). The school and society and The child and the curriculum. University of Chicago Press.
Engle, R. A. (2006). Framing interactions to foster generative learning: A situative explanation of transfer in a community of learners classroom. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 15(4), 451-498.
Engle, R. A., & Conant, F. R. (2002). Guiding principles for fostering productive disciplinary engagement: Explaining an emergent argument in a community of learners classroom. Cognition and Instruction, 20(4), 399-483.
Engle, R. A., Lam, D. P., Meyer, X. S., & Nix, S. E. (2012). How does expansive framing promote transfer? Several proposed explanations and a research agenda for investigating them. Educational Psychologist, 47(3), 215-231.
Engle, R. A., Nguyen, P., & Mendelson, A. (2011). The influence of framing on transfer: Initial evidence from a tutoring experiment. Instructional Science, 39(5), 603-628.
Esmonde, I., & Booker, A. N. (2017). Power and privilege in the learning sciences. Routledge.
Esteban-Guitart, M., & Moll, L. C. (2014). Funds of identity: A new concept based on the Funds of Knowledge approach. Culture & Psychology, 20(1), 31-48.
Freedman, E. B., Hickey, D. T., Schamberger, B., & Harris, T. (2025). Reimaging productive disciplinary engagement and expansive framing: A synthesis of equity-oriented scholarship. Educational Psychologist, 1-20. https://doi.org/10.1080/00461520.2024.2441671

Furnell, S. (2021). The cybersecurity workforce and skills. Computers & Security, 100, 102080. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cose.2020.102080
Herrington, J., & Oliver, R. (1999). Using situated learning and multimedia to investigate higher-order thinking. Journal of Interactive Learning Research, 10(1), 3-24.
Herrington, J., Reeves, T. C., & Oliver, R. (2014). Authentic learning environments. Springer.
Hickey, D., Duncan, J., Gaylord, C., Hitchcock, C., Itow, R. C., & Stephens, S. (2020a). gPortfolios: a pragmatic approach to online asynchronous assignments. Information & Learning Sciences, 121 (5/6), 273-283.
Hickey, D. T., Chartrand, G. T., & Andrews, C. D. (2020b). Expansive framing as pragmatic theory for online and hybrid instructional design. Educational Technology Research and Development, 68 (2), 751-782.
Hickey, D. T., Kindfield, A. C., Horwitz, P., & Christie, M. A. T. (2003). Integrating curriculum, instruction, assessment, and evaluation in a technology-supported genetics learning environment. American Educational Research Journal, 40 (2), 495-538.
Hickey, D. T., Luo, Q. M., & Lam, C. (2025). A stridently situative perspective on inclusive engagement and assessment. Invited chapter for G. A. D. Liem, J. Fredricks, & Z. Y. Wong (Eds.), Research on sociocultural influences on motivation and learning (Volume 15). Emerald Publishers
Hickey, D. T., & Rehak, A. (2013). Wikifolios and participatory assessment for engagement, understanding, and achievement in online courses. Journal of Educational Multimedia and Hypermedia, 22 (4), 407-441.
Hickey, D. T., & Zuiker, S. J. (2012). Multilevel assessment for discourse, understanding, and achievement.
Journal of the Learning Sciences, 21 (4), 522-582.
Hmelo-Silver, C. E. (2004). Problem-based learning: What and how do students learn? Educational Psychology Review, 16 (3), 235-266.
Hogg, L., & Volman, M. (2020). A synthesis of funds of identity research: Purposes, tools, pedagogical approaches, and outcomes. Review of Educational Research, 90(6), 862-895.
Jiménez, J. (2021, September 30). UMass Amherst hires cybersecurity firm to investigate racist emails. New York Times. https://www.nytimes.com/2021/09/30/education/umass-amherst-racist-emails.html
Ladson‐Billings, G. (1995). But that’s just good teaching! The case for culturally relevant pedagogy. Theory into Practice, 34(3), 159-165.
Manson, D., & Pike, R. (2014). The case for depth in cybersecurity education. ACM Inroads, 5(1), 47-52. Mayer, R. E. (2002). Multimedia learning. Psychology of Learning and Motivation, 41, 85-139.
Margolis, J., Estrella, R., Goode, J., Holme, J. J., & Nao, K. (2008/2017). Stuck in the shallow end: Education, race, and computing (First Edition/Revised Edition). MIT Press.
Mountrouidou, X., Vosen, D., Kari, C., Azhar, M. Q., Bhatia, S., Gagne, G., ... & Yuen, T. T. (2019). Securing the human: a review of literature on broadening diversity in cybersecurity education. Proceedings of the Working Group Reports on Innovation and Technology in Computer Science Education (pp. 157-176)
National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. (2018). How people learn II: Learners, contexts, and cultures. National Academies Press.
National Academy of Sciences, Engineering, and Mathematics (2021). Cultivating interest and competencies in computing: Authentic experiences and design factors. National Academy Press
National Research Council (2000). How people learn: Mind, brain, experience, and schooling National Academies Press.
Neri, R. C., Lozano, M., & Gomez, L. M. (2019). (Re) framing resistance to culturally relevant education as a multilevel learning problem. Review of Research in Education, 43(1), 197-226.
Paris, D. (2012). Culturally sustaining pedagogy: A needed change in stance, terminology, and practice. Educational Researcher, 41 (3), 93-97.
Pinkard, N., Erete, S., Martin, C. K., & McKinney de Royston, M. (2017). Digital youth divas: Exploring narrative-driven curriculum to spark middle school girls’ interest in computational activities. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 26(3), 477-516.
Sawyer, R. K. (2006). Introduction: The new science of learning. In R. K. Sawyer (Eds.) The Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences (2nd Edition, 1-18). Cambridge University Press.
Scroxton, A. (2020, June 4). Black Lives Matter activists targeted by cyber attacks. ComputerWeekly.com. https://www.computerweekly.com/news/252484161/Black-Lives-Matter-activists-targeted-by-cyber- attacks
Singley, M. K. (1989). The transfer of cognitive skill. Harvard University Press.
Solano‐Flores, G., & Nelson‐Barber, S. (2001). On the cultural validity of science assessments. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 38(5), 553-573.

Uttamchandani, S. Tager, T., & Hickey, D. (2015, September 11). Calculus PLAnet: Promising first steps in participatory supplemental instruction in mathematics. [Blogpost]. Remediating Assessment. https://remediatingassessment.blogspot.com/2015/09/calculus-planet-promising-first-step-in.html
Vakil, S. (2020). “I’ve always been scared that someday I’m going to sell out”: Exploring the relationship between political identity and learning in computer science education. Cognition and Instruction, 38(2), 87-115.