Routine Care to Build Trust in Co-Research with Young Children

D Teo Keifert, University of North Texas, danielle.keifert@unt.edu Andria Gentry, University of North Texas, andria.gentry@my.unt.edu Little Poof and Big Book, Team Poof, learningfamily02@gmail.com
Abstract: Counter to pejorative representations of children’s competencies, we show young children can lead co-research when they trust adults will follow. Our research team—child, caregiver, university-based members—present interactional, multimodal analysis of video data in a relational learning ecology. We examine the role of talk, gaze, touch, body orientation, and facial expressions in communicating care. We then link patterns of care to the establishment of trust; namely children’s trust that adults will follow. We begin with an opening moment of our seventh visit (roughly 6 months into our partnership) to illustrate trust in action, and then detail a focal child’s showing of a valued artifact as a coordinated display of care and affirmation of the child’s dignity as learner and leader.

Introduction
Children are often poorly represented in research which conceptualizes them as not-yet-persons, shares pejorative representations of their capabilities, and assumes universal childhoods (Cannella, 1999; Lee et al., 2020; Vossoughi & Gutierrez, 2014). This harms researchers and educators’ ability to recognize children’s role in shaping community and culture. Moreover, as Templeton articulates (2021): “many adults are unable, and perhaps even unwilling, to conceive of children’s desires and capacities to have a say over their own representations” (p. 3). These biases shape research approaches that assume adult researchers must solely direct studies of children’s learning. In the Learning, Being, and Doing (LBD) in Families project, we centered children in a study of their own interests and practice. Here we examine how care and trust supported children’s leadership and elucidate relational learning ecologies co-developed by a COVID-competent child + caregiver + university (uni) team.
Families are a fundamental setting for early learning (e.g., Keifert, 2021; Rogoff, 2003). Moreover, families are a critical site for intergenerational learning (González et al., 2006), though intergenerational learning also occurs outside of family contexts (Newman & Hatton-Yeo, 2008). We recognize intergenerational learning as multi-directional (Ho, 2010). We were particularly interested in documenting, interpreting, and sharing understandings of existing practices for family-based learning and studying processes for co-developing emergent practices for intergenerational learning within research teams of children, caregivers, and uni team members.
Given the geopolitical context of COVID, the lack of vaccines for children under 5 at the time or recruitment, and the PI’s immunocompromised status, the uni team made the decision to form COVID-competent learning communities as the context for this work. COVID-competent communities are a new phenomenon co- occurring with the emergence of the COVID-19 virus in 2019/2020. Despite reports to the contrary (e.g., Nirappil et al., 2023), many people continue COVID-competent behaviors after the U.S. government’s COVID ended the public health emergency (May 2023). Prior research documented the impact of COVID on school enrollment (e.g., Bauman & Cranney, 2020), and COVID “learning loss” (Engzell et al., 2021; Donnelly & Patrinos, 2022) including in popular media (e.g., Callimachi, 2021). Developing counter narratives to deficit narratives about COVID-competent family learning drove our work, as well as a desire to develop safe social alternatives for children to engage with non-family, safe adults.

Framework
Research demonstrates multimodal analysis is necessary for understanding human sensemaking (e.g., Goodwin, 2018), particularly in coming to understand the affective dimensions of interactions (e.g., Goodwin & Cekaite, 2018). Moreover, research with children has long depended upon analyses of multiple modalities to ensure that children’s ideas, perspectives, and contributions are recognized, particularly for young children who are in the process of developing their communicative repertoires (Ochs, 1979). In the present work, multimodality sheds light on the interactional work of care and trust as necessary for developing and sustaining children’s leadership. Multimodality is critical in understanding affective dimensions of interaction between child and caregivers, and the developing relationships between families and uni team members. This requires coming to understand the “cultural logics of publicly witnessable affect display” (Goodwin & Cekaite, 2018, p. 20). These logics help to identify caring—“acting with respect to affection and regard for another to enhance the welfare or well-being of the party cared for” (p. 121)—in the interactional record. Like Goodwin & Cekaite, we see care as
multi-directional within intergenerational learning ecologies.

We attend in particular to forms of care that support children’s leadership in relational learning ecologies (Korczynski, 2012); we examine care in shared showing and the development of trust. We focus on showing as a key mechanism by which children share their perspectives, experience, practice, and interests. A showing, a common practice in many families (e.g., Keifert & Stevens, 2019), occurs when something is shared and contextualized. Contextualization may include telling of the artifact’s history (e.g., when it was made, how it was made/remade), how it operates (e.g., how it works, what parts do what), and its purpose (e.g., its job, how it relates to other artifacts, people, or beings). For instance, as Jamie (age 4) was showing how to move with four feet, his mom said he looked like a frog (Keifert & Marin, 2018). Jamie’s response was to shift to embodying a frog saying, “Ribbit Ribbit” and finally exclaiming “Yeah! I AM a frog!” Like all showings, this was an interactional activity; Jamie and Mom both shaped this inquiry. At the root of showing is shared attention as a form of care; when a child makes an interactional bid for attending to a particular idea, object, or practice, care is demonstrated when adults share that focus of attention. Engaging in collective showings are acts of care in that these interactions serve as a means for demonstrating “regard for another to enhance the welfare or well-being of the party cared for” (Goodwin & Ceakite, 2018, p. 121). In our learning ecologies, care included the cultivation of educational dignity—"the multifaceted sense of a person’s value generated via meaningful participation in substantive intra- and inter- personal learning experiences that recognize and cultivate one’s mind, humanity, and potential” (Espinoza et al., 2020, p. 19). We argue further that, “It is not enough to state someone has dignity; it must be enacted and affirmed” (Keifert et al., 2021, p. 796). Thus, recognizing care through attending to showing is an accomplishment that can be understood through analysis of multimodal interaction.
We conceptualize trust drawing on studies of communities of equals (specifically communities focused on teaching and learning). Trust includes care, compassion, and valuing of each other’s contributions, ideas, and experience (Cranston, 2011; Fullan, 1999; Hargreaves, 2007; see also relational equity; Boaler, 2008). Bryk and Schneider (2002) conceptualize relational trust as centered on relationships between people, in our case, relations between family/uni, adults/child, caregiver/child, and uni/child. Through these relationships, trust develops as there is a shared understanding about each members’ expectations and obligations—especially children’s trust that adults will follow their leadership. Moreover, trust becomes visible in the interactional record as obligations are fulfilled. Thus, through the interactional work of care, norms of interaction can develop that lead to trust. That trust is demonstrable in the record as children are affirmed as leaders as they direct the collective teams’ attention through arrangements like showings. Taken together, care and trust form the interactional basis upon which LBD teams organized to center children’s experience, interests, and practices as they lead learning ecologies.
As we analyze touch along with other modalities that communicate care in interactions, we will need to consider both idiocultures—local cultural practices within a small community or what Goodwin & Cekaite (2018) name as “haptic cultural repertoires” (p. 128)—as well as broader cultural norms. In LBD, our engagement as a research teams occurred across virtual spaces with child and caregiver in the same physical space and uni members each in different physical spaces. This contextual detail meant that touch between uni and family team members was not possible, and thus care depended on multiple other modalities. For instance, care was demonstrated in taking up children’s suggestions (e.g., purchasing the same version of Guess Who to play with kids), listening to their stories, responding to their questions, and attending to the things in which they were interested. Using this framework as a guide, we ask: How does routine demonstrations of care support children’s trust that adults will follow their lead in relational learning ecologies?

Methods
The Learning, Being, and Doing (LBD) in Families Study was designed to provide counter-examples to narratives of learning-loss popular in the media (Callimachi, 2021) through research-partnerships with children and families to shape anti-deficit narratives about intergenerational learning, being, and doing (Vossoughi & Booker, 2020; González et al., 2006) in COVID-competent families. The focus on COVID-competent families emerged out of the needs in the fall of 2021/spring of 2022 as vaccine rollout demonstrated a societal dropping of COVID precautions, leading to the marginalization of COVID-competent people. Our Principal Investigator, Teo, is a member of the COVID-competent community as a disabled and immunocompromised human. As a result, Teo was interested in understanding COVID-competent families as a context for learning, being, and doing.
LBD draws on co-observation, an emergent method (Keifert et al., 2024). LBD co-observation is a syncretic method—merging multiple research traditions with everyday practices (Gutiérrez & Jurow, 2016)—to examine children’s lived experience (Rogoff et al., 2018). This centered families’ existing storying practices— documenting, reflecting, theorizing (Ochs et al., 1992)—with traditions of video-based research (Jordan & Henderson, 1995; DeLiema et al., 2023). Thus, families were involved in research agenda-setting, data production and collection, and data interpretation. By partnering with children to “tell their story on their terms” (Gutiérrez et al., 2019, p. 9), LBD supported ethically valid research—attending to the distribution of research materials,

resources, and activities—to produce representations of learning embedded in participants’ understanding of their family culture.
Data collection
This analysis focuses on one LBD team: Team Poof. Team Poof included Little Poof (5yrs, they/them), Big Book (Mom, she/her), Teo (they/them), and Andria (she/her). Data were collected over 15 months during the core data collection (June 2022-August 2023) and supplemented by ongoing reflection and analysis by research teams over an additional 12+ months (ongoing at the time of submission, Fall 2023-Fall 2024). Virtual sessions included team members in synchronous engagement via Zoom, recorded to the cloud to capture multiple views (i.e., gallery, speaker, shared screen) and generate auto-transcriptions. We created content logs (e.g., Erickson & Schultz, 1997; Jordan & Henderson, 1995) during our sessions using Zoom chat, which we call Live Logs as they were generated synchronously during sessions. In the core data collection, Team Poof gathered 26.37 hours of virtual sessions, and 133 additional photos/videos shared via text and/or Google Photos from asynchronous activities. After consenting, we engaged in a preliminary interview to determine shared interests. The present data come from a transition from the first phase of the study (Playdates) to the second (Show & Tell). Playdates focused on seeding relationships, demonstrating care, growing trust, and developing local showing practice. Show & Tell Dates focused on seeding & growing shared practice for making and storying (data interpretation) during showings. However, the focal moment occurred at the start of the session, so it followed the norms we had established in Playdates.
Data analysis
Methods of analysis were based on a syncretic approach blending children and families’ everyday interpretive practices with traditional-research forms of analysis. Everyday analysis took the form of storying artifacts and practices and reflection on videos and images of prior LBD visits. Traditional forms included Interaction Analysis or IA (Jordan & Henderson, 1995) and analysis of Co-Operative Action (Goodwin, 2018; Goodwin & Cekaite, 2018). We also drew on Och’s (1979) commitments to foreground children’s contributions as we developed representations of our findings. Teo engaged in iterative refinement of hypotheses (Engle et al., 2014) by examining related records of practice such as data from non-synchronous sources, primarily Google Photos captured and shared by both the Poof Family and Teo. They then brought a selection of moments first to two IA sessions, and then to Team Poof for collaborative reflection along with Jefferson (2004) transcriptions and comic-like representations of key moments. Teo shared the developing argument with the Poof Family to gain their perspectives using this package of materials. Additionally, Teo shared the drafted and revised manuscript with BB. BB was encouraged to share that draft in meaningful ways with LP.

Findings
Making was a focus of all Team Poof virtual dates starting in summer of 2022 through our analytical meetings in the spring of 2024. Little Poof (LP) enjoyed making using many different tools: DUPLOs, Legos, Magna-tiles, motors, Squishy Circuits, cardboard and more. After discussing the images and comic strips from the analysis below, Teo asked LP what they liked about making things and they said, “I make hard things.” LP and Big Book (BB) explained that LP took pride in the challenge of making things work. We also discussed how LP’s interest in making came about. BB shared that LP had always been interested in how things worked, starting with a fascination with the mechanisms of their salad spinner and continuing until today.
The focal moment began at the start of our virtual date. Just after BB said, “There we go::::” to indicate the computer was set up, LP said “hi” and Teo asked, “s’that Lego in your hands?” At the moment of Teo’s utterance, LP was off-screen with only their shoulder visible. As soon as Teo asked their question, LP shifted into frame, looked at the camera, and then lifted their Lego creation and named it “A truck. A water truck” (Figure 1).

Figure 1
Comic A. Little Poof Slides Into Frame to Show the Water Truck


In addition to Teo creating interactional space for LP to share about their water truck, BB made physical space by shifting to the side and back as LP moved into frame.
This moment illustrates LP’s trust that they could begin showing. This claim is supported by the speed of their movement into frame, their establishing of gaze, and initiation of showing the water truck. This is evidence of trust as LP demonstrated an expectation of an appreciative audience for their showing, and in fact that expectation was fulfilled by the adults throughout LP’s showing which continued for 3 minutes and 22 seconds. BB and Teo demonstrated interest in LP’s new practice of Lego-making and marveled together at LP’s learning. For instance, when BB noticed that the water truck had dropped out of the Zoom camera frame, she pointed at it and said, “They can’t see it” and LP immediately moved the truck back into view.
After LP introduced the Water Truck, its parts (the grill, the fan, the water taps), and how it worked (“it brings water to everyone,” water comes out both sides of the tap), LP explained the Water Truck was “just pretend” and was “just a toy” to which Teo replied that they could “think about how it would work, too.” LP then emphasized that it was a toy called Lego leading BB to ask, “What does that mean?” BB’s question of what Lego means led to an exchange of learning from LP about their solo activity and BB and Teo marveling together at what BB later named as LP’s learning “leaps.” Comic B (Figure 2) illustrates the moment when LP named the Water Truck a Lego toy while showing the Water Truck to the Zoom screen. In the next frame, LP shifted to showing BB the Water Truck after BB asked, “What does that mean?” LP then explained that these were “widdle Legos” as BB showed the water truck to the Zoom camera. In the final frame, BB said, “widdle ones” and gave LP a kiss on the head.

Figure 2
Comic B. Explaining That the Water Truck Is a Widdle Lego Toy


Comic C. Marveling at LP’s Story of Their First Lego Making by Asking More Questions

Comic D. BB and Teo Take a Moment to Look at Each Other in Astonishment and Joy


As LP showed Teo the sphere in which the Lego’s came, BB began to ask questions to confirm where LP had found the Legos (in the sphere) and that they put it together without help from the instructions (Transcript A; 2:54-3:00). Transcript A (Table 1) should be read in coordination with Comic C and Comic D (Figure 2) to understanding talk and action in relation to each other.
Table 1
Transcript A Marveling at LP’s First Lego Making
Time Stamp
Talk & (Action)
Turn Characterization


Sharing
[00:02:36.06]
BB looks at ball in LP’s hand


[00:02:36.09]
BB: You just got this (pickt of this (Comic C: BB gestures 
Clarifying



[00:02:37.24]
LP: Yes
Clarifying
[00:02:38.21]
BB: [This in here? (Comic C: BB pointingall)
Clarifying




[00:02:39.20]


[00:02:42.16]
BB: And you put [it together?
Clarifying, Marveling


Marveling
[00:02:43.29]
LP: Yes and I bet-and before I turned it into saned it into special tru- a different water truck (Cos to the camera and with mouth opbig in response)


[00:02:54.05]
BB: You did? [And ( ) (BB holding instructions and unfolding) Come here! (BB waves LP to come back next to her, in view of the Zoom camera)
Marveling


Marveling
[00:02:57.01]
LP moves to sit next to BB


[00:02:57.29]
BB: Did you look (LP looks at instructions in BB’s hand) at the instructions?
Clarifying










[00:03:02.05]
T big grin
Marveling






Marveling
[00:03:05.10]
T: Super cool!
Marveling
[00:03:06.22]
BB: What?! That’s so awesome.
Marveling
[00:03:09.04]


[00:03:11.02]


[00:03:19.06]
BB finishes unfolding instructions


[00:03:19.17]
BB: [Yeah↑↑
Marveling
[00:03:21.15]
BB shows instructions to camera










Throughout, BB’s tone was one of wonder at LP’s activitur characterization of tharveling—“to become filled with surprisemazed curiosity” (Meriam-Webster, n.d.).explained, BB picked up this sphere as a party favor some months earlier thinking that it would be a good way to see if LP was ready to build with Legos without making a purchase (Family Poof often gathereBuy Nothing group rather than purchasng the chance to try oirst was a helpful way to navigate LP found the spherto make something on their own without either BB or Appa knowing. After BB finished with her line of questions, both BB and Teo provided feedback that by tone and spoken works could be considering alternating between clarifying the details of LP’s making and marveling at their accomplishment. After, BB turned to the Zoom camera and began an “adult aside” speaking directly with Teo to discuss this and what she described as other recent learning “leaps.”
We highlight several features of LP’s showing and BB and Teo as active responders in that showing. There are several witnessable affective displays, including BB’s kissing LP’s head (Comic B, Figure 2) and BB’s amazed gaze and Teo’s grin in response (Comic D, Figure 2). Additionally, both BB and Teo provided verbal feedback (Transcript A; “Super cool!” “What?! That’s so awesome!”). These multiple affective displays were a part of establishing trust as BB and Teo fulfilled the expectations of an appreciative audience for LP’s showing. This trust is evidenced in LP’s continued telling throughout the nearly three and a half minutes.
Upon reviewing the present analysis during a later Reflection Date (third phase of the study), LP and BB were excited to reshare the story of getting Legos from the piñata and other stories and experiences that followed the showing of the Water Truck. We also shared the anonymized version of a manuscript-in-progress talking about “how cool it is” that they helped us learn about LP’s making and asked if there was “anything else [we] should know about the all the ways that you make things?” As LP ran to get artifacts made with various prior making materials, Teo said to BB that these were the very “tight tangles” of making that we wanted a chance to reflect on together. When Teo asked where LP’s interest in making came from, BB retold the story of LP’s interest in salad spinner (referenced at the start of the findings section), studying various versions across friends’ homes to understand the mechanisms. BB went on, “All children have these curiosities” that you can foster and “follow that

lead.” These shared making practices shaped our inquiry and fruitful conversations about diverse ideas and experiences across the learning ecology, shaped by LP’s practices and driven by LP’s interests through the interactional efforts of Team Poof, and demonstrate these practices began before our study and continued to develop over the 15 months between the Water Truck and the first and second reviews of the manuscript.

Discussion
We have previously written dignity “must be enacted and affirmed” (Keifert et al., 2021, p. 796). Through repeated acts of care in attending to Little Poof’s showings, Team Poof cultivated LP’s dignity as a learner and leader and developed LP’s trust that if they led, adults would follow. Our discussion reflects on how we affirmed Little Poof’s dignity as a learner through interactional work to center LP’s interests and practices and how adults demonstrated routine care in ways that led to LP’s trust that we would value their showings; that is, how routine care led to trust. These showings in turn anchored our co-observation practice.
Care and trust
Multiple displays of care and trust were evident throughout our analysis. These displays are both mundane and powerful. For instance, Team Poof engaged in forms of “boundary intertwining” (Goodwin & Cekaite, 2018, p. 127) as an opportunity for displaying affection and reconnecting e.g. our opening (“s’ that Legos in your hand?” “A truck. A water truck.”) demonstrated an intertwining as we re-established engagement through shared attention on the Water Truck. Establishing shared attention itself was a form of care given that our focus on was on LP’s practice and interests. Specifically, we focused on showings as opportunities for demonstrations of care and fulfilment of trust. Care and trust were interactionally evident in our discussion of “widdle Legos.” Our claims of care and trust were based on multiple modalities as sampled in Table 2.

Table 2
Sample Data on Which Claims were Based

Claim Talk Touch Gaze & Body Orientation

BB: Did you look (LP

BB shows care for LP’s
showing of the Water Truck.

Teo shows care for LP’s
showing and marvels with BB.
looks at instructions in BB’s hand) at the instructions?


LP: No. I just-


BB: No, you just did it yourself?
BB holds up truck to camera
T big grin


LP: I did it how I wanted to make one. BB: Well that’s (
)
T: Super cool!
BB: What?! That’s so awesome.



Teo shows care by
inviting LP Teo: ’s that Lego’s in
to show. your hand?
LP moves back in frame LP: a truck (LP holds truck up in front of
LP shows face towards camera)
trust in Teo LP: a water truck
as an audience.


We (re)present this data to highlight a few things. First, multiple modalities served as witnessable affect displays as individuals attended to the welfare of others. For instance, BB kissing LP’s head, BB asking questions about LP’s water truck, and Teo’s gaze and grin all demonstrate care. Similarly, trust was evidenced through LP’s demonstration of an expectation that Teo would listen to their showing as they moved physically into frame and began to talk about the Water Truck as well as their body orientation and gaze towards the camera. Trust was fulfilled by BB’s shift in body to the side and back to make room for LP to take center-frame and Teo’s listening to their showing as well as multiple displays of excitement through talk and facial expression. Trust was expected and fulfilled through demonstrations of care via attention on LP’s Water Truck.
We also note touch was not a part of Teo or Andria’s displays of care for LP and BB, nor vice versa, given the physical constraints of the virtual space. While this design was a result of meeting the needs of COVID- competent families and researchers, our time together demonstrated that virtual relational care and trust are possible. We do not diminish the importance of in-person intercorporeality, but rather recognize care and trust can be established in the absence of touch. In place of trust, delicate negotiations of facing formations (Kendon, 1990) become particularly important for showings. Figure 1 illustrates this in the second frame as LP moved to center themself in view of the camera and BB shifted to the side and back to make physical space, as well as just after when LP dropped their hands so the water truck was out of view and BB noted this allowing LP to reposition the truck in view of the camera for Teo and Andria. Similarly, in the showing of the fan, both LP and BB took hold of the fan to display it and show how the fan was turned on. Ensuring everyone could see the artifact of interest takes effort in any interaction, but LP’s growing competence in navigating showing in our virtual space demonstrated ways they had and continued to take on leadership in our learning ecology.
The result of this work was that Team Poof centered LP’s making practice via routine care that led to LP’s trust that adults would follow their lead. Shah and Lewis (2019) describe this as participatory equity, or “a condition where opportunities to participate—and participation itself—are fairly distributed among all [people] involved in a learning interaction” (p. 428). LP was the team’s resource for choosing attentional directions, affirming their dignity as a learner and leader, and developing trust that as they led, adults would follow.
Children’s leadership in co-observation
Co-Observation created a context for relational learning ecologies centered on children’s practice and led by children’s interests. More specifically, Little Poof, Big Book, Teo, and Andria collaborated to interactionally achieve a centering on LP’s practice and support LP’s leadership. For instance, our understanding of LP’s making practice includes many instances of watching LP make things, engaging in showings of made artifacts, listening to the stories that contextualize makings and artifacts, and hearing explicit reflection from both LP and BB about LP’s making practice. In future work, we hope to develop more forms of co-analysis, including tools that might support creating visual representations together with children. The goal of this work is to further push the boundaries of co-observation, which currently includes active methods of agenda-setting, data collection, and data analysis, but relatively limited forms of co-authorship.
Our analysis illustrated the importance of care and trust in co-observation relational learning ecologies, as demonstrated through witnessable displays of affection and expectation and cultivating LP’s dignity as a learner, leader, and author of “their story on their terms” (Gutiérrez et al., 2019, p. 9). Moreover, these ecologies were spread across virtual and physical spaces. In an era when hostilities towards immigrants and trans humans at cites of U.S. immigration and even travel within the United Sttaes(McNeill, 2025; Watson, 2025) and ongoing quad-demics (Kekatos, 2025) threaten health and livelihoods, traveling to visit families within and across borders is increasingly difficult meaning that research on the possibilities of seeding and growing relational intergenerational learning ecologies is increasingly needed. Moreover, technology-mediated relationships are a common feature of many diasporic communities, including one of the LBD families, Family Wonderland, as they seek to maintain relationships and belonging across borders (see Madianou, 2019). While LBD learning ecologies spanned virtual spaces, there is good reason to expect that similar possibilities exist in face-to-face settings. Others trying to adopt similar methods should keep in mind that COVID-competent families expressed a need to have COVID-competent friendly adults in their lives of their children, meaning that our uni team members offered a valued opportunity. Researchers should ensure they, too are offering opportunities that families need/desire.
Regardless of the context of future relational learning ecologies with young children, there are a few features of the LBD study that will continue to be central to success in this form of co-research. Gathering video data was critical as it provided evidence of the multiple modalities through which care and trust were demonstrated as well as supporting attending to the various showings that led to LP shaping Team Poof’s research. So too was reflecting on preliminary data representations and reflective storytelling central to our following LP’s experience, interests, and practices. This allowed us to move from a surveillance model of video data collection towards collaborative, relational work within a learning ecology (see Vossoughi & Escudé, 2016). In face-to-face settings,

there is the additional possibility (Vossoughi & Escudé, 2016; Gutiérrez et al., 2019; Greenberg, 2019) that children can help position cameras and other recording devices for themselves. This work was also a move from mere assemblages of collections of moments by researchers alone (e.g., Keifert & Stevens, 2019; Keifert, 2021) towards weaving of histories, perspectives, and knowledge systems (Keifert et al., 2022). It is a method that supported direct push-back on notions of learning loss within families, particularly COVID-competent families as well as pejorative representations of children’s capabilities or universal childhoods.

Conclusion
Team Poof provided evidence that children can lead co-research when they have trust that adults will follow. That trust was built through displays of care, expectations that were fulfilled, and creative co-exploration of the very practice that children center in their own lives. That trust was maintained to collaborative interaction to center LP’s interests and practices and keep those centered. Children led our research in ways that drew on the multiple contexts in which they lived and learned including our shared virtual space, informal learning spaces that focused on their interests, and even subsequent trips and life experience that reminded them of our time together. The Learning, Being, and Doing in Families Study allowed our team to ensure that that children’s perspectives were centered, and family culture and experience across settings informed our work together.

References
Boaler, J. (2008). Promoting ‘relational equity’ and high mathematics achievement through an innovative mixed- ability approach. British Educational Research Journal, 34(2), 167–194.
Bauman, K., & Cranney, S. (2020). School enrollment in the United States: Population Characteristics. Current Population Reports, 20-584.
Bryk, A., & Schneider, B. (2002). Trust in schools: A core resource for improvement. New York: Russell Sage. Callimachi, R. (2021, May). “I used to like school’: An 11-year old’s struggle with pandemic learning. The New
York Times. https://www.nytimes.com/2021/05/05/us/remote-learning-education-pandemic.html Cannella, G. S. (1999). The scientific discourse of education: Predetermining the lives of others—Foucault,
education, and children. Contemporary Issues in Early Childhood, 1(1), 36-44.
Cranston, J. (2011). Relational trust: The glue that binds a professional learning community. Alberta journal of educational research, 57(1), 59-72.
DeLiema, D., Hufnagle, A., Vimal Rao, V.N., Baker, J., Valerie, J., & Kim, J. (2023) Methodological innovations at the intersection of video-based educational research traditions: Reflections on relevance, data selection, and phenomena of interest, International Journal of Research & Method in Education, 46(1), 19-36, DOI:10.1080/1743727X.2021.2011196
Donnelly, R., & Patrinos, H. A. (2022). Learning loss during Covid-19: An early systematic review. Prospects, 51(4), 601-609.
Engzell, P., Frey, A., & Verhagen, M. D. (2021). Learning loss due to school closures during the COVID-19 pandemic. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 118(17), e2022376118.
Erickson, F., & Schultz, J. (1997). When is a context? Some issues and methods in the analysis of social competence. Mind, culture, and activity: Seminal papers from the laboratory of comparative human cognition.
Fullan, M. (1999). Change forces: The sequel. Philadelphia, PA: Falmer Press. Goldstein, 2020 Goodwin, C. (2018). Co-operative action. Cambridge University Press.
Goodwin, M., & Cekaite, A. (2018). Embodied family choreography: Practices of control, care, and mundane creativity. Routledge.
González, N., Moll, L. C., & Amanti, C. (Eds.). (2006). Funds of knowledge: Theorizing practices in households, communities, and classrooms. Routledge.
Greenberg, D. (2019). Critical participatory explorations of youth STEM pathways. Dissertation, Michigan State University. https://doi.org/10.25335/qmps-9224
Gutiérrez, K., Becker, B.L.C., Espinoza, M.L., Cortes, K.L., Cortez, A., Lizárraga, J.R.,…Yin, P., (2019). Youth as historical actors in the production of possible futures. Mind, Culture, and Activity, 38(3).
Gutiérrez, K. D., & Jurow, A. S. (2016). Social design experiments: Toward equity by design. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 25(4).
Hargreaves, A. (2007). Sustainable professional learning communities. In L. Stoll & K.S. Louis (Eds.), Professional learning communities: Divergence, depth and dilemmas (pp. 181-196), London: McGraw.
Ho, C. Y. (2010). Intergenerational learning (Between generation X & Y) in learning families: A narrative inquiry.
International Education Studies, 3(4), 59-72.
Jefferson, G. (2004). Glossary of transcript symbols with an introduction. Conversation Analysis.

Jordan, B., & Henderson, A. (1995). Interaction analysis: Foundations and practice. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 4(1).
Keifert, D. T. (2021). Family culture as context for learning through inquiry. Cognition and instruction, 39(3), 242-274.
Keifert, D.T., K. Gutiérrez, Goodwin., M.H., & Marin, A.M. (co-chairs) (June, 2021). Dignity Affirming Learning Contexts [Symposium]. Proceedings of the 1st Annual Meeting of the International Society of the Learning Sciences 2021, Volume ICLS Proceedings, 795-802. Bochum, Germany (Online): International Society of the Learning Sciences. https://repository.isls.org//handle/1/7585
Keifert & Marin, 2018
Keifert, D., & Stevens, R. (2019). Inquiry as a members’ phenomenon: Young children as competent inquirers.
Journal of the Learning Sciences, 28(2), 240-278.
Kekatos, M. (2025 January). What to know about 'quad-demic' of COVID, flu, RSV and norovirus in US. ABC News. https://abcnews.go.com/Health/quad-demic-covid-flu-rsv-norovirus-us/story?id=117747763
Kendon, A. (1990). Conducting interaction: Patterns of behavior in focused encounters (Vol. 7). CUP Archive. Korczynski, A. M. (2012). The Importance of Performance in Learning a Second Language. AI Practitioner. Lee, C. D., Meltzoff, A. N., & Kuhl, P. K. (2020). The braid of human learning and development: Neuro-
physiological processes and participation in cultural practices. In Handbook of the Cultural Foundations of Learning (pp. 24-43). Routledge.
Madianou, M. (2019). Migration, transnational families, and new communication technologies. The handbook of diasporas, media, and culture, 577-590.
McNeill, Z., (2025 March). Canada, Europe Issue Travel Advisories After Tourists Detained in US. Truth Out. https://truthout.org/articles/canada-europe-issue-travel-advisories-after-tourists-detained-in-us/
Merriam Webster. (n.d.). Marvel. Merriam Webster: Dictionary. https://www.merriam- webster.com/dictionary/marvel
Newman, S., & Hatton-Yeo, A. (2008). Intergenerational learning and the contributions of older people. Ageing horizons, 8(10), 31-39.
Nirappil, F., Yarber, A., & Regan, S. (2023) Covid isn’t over, but even the most cautious Americans are moving on. Washington Post. Retrieved July 1, 2023. https:// www.washingtonpost.com/ health/ 2023/06/25/covid-precautions-summer-vaccines-deaths/
Ochs, E. (1979). Transcription as theory. Developmental Pragmatics, 10(1), 43-72.
Ochs, E., Taylor, C., Rudolph, D., & Smith, R. (1992). Storytelling as a theory‐building activity. Discourse Processes, 15(1), 37-72.
Rogoff, B. (2003). The cultural nature of human development. Oxford University Press.
Rogoff, B., Dahl, A., & Callanan, M. (2018). The importance of understanding children’s lived experience.
Developmental Review, 50, 5-15.
Shah, N., & Lewis, C. M. (2019). Amplifying and attenuating inequity in collaborative learning: Toward an analytical framework. Cognition and instruction, 37(4), 423-452.
Templeton, T. N. (2021). Whose story is it? Thinking through early childhood with young children’s photographs.
Occasional Paper Series, 2021(45), 8.
Vossoughi, S., & Booker, A., (2020, April 22). A dialogue on historicities, futurities, and educational imagination in these times. [Presentation]. Speculative Education, Online Conference.
Vossoughi, S., & Escudé, M. (2016). What does the camera communicate? An inquiry into the politics and possibilities of video research on learning. Anthropology & Education Quarterly, 47(1), 42-58.
Vossoughi, S., & Gutiérrez, K. (2014). Studying movement, hybridity, and change: Toward a multi-sited sensibility for research on learning across contexts and borders. National Society for the Study of Education, 113(2), 603-632.
Watson, J. (2025 March). Weekslong lockups of European tourists at US borders spark fears of traveling to America. Associated Press. https://apnews.com/article/border-tourists-german-canadian-detention- immigration-408cd27338e8065268fabc835f8b0c34

Acknowledgments
Teo led the analysis and writing of the manuscript. The methods section articulates the analytical role of Little Poof and Big Book through in-the-moment interaction and asides as well as subsequent opportunities for shared reflection and an opportunity to review and critique drafts of the manuscript. Andria contributed throughout data collection, preliminary analysis, paper conceptualization, and manuscript feedback cycles. Finally, the Entanglements Lab and University of North Texas and the Interaction Lab at Vanderbilt University provided ongoing feedback. This work was supported by Spencer Foundation (Small Grant #202200143).